
Dude, you must be feeling like Cassandra   at the moment. So precient, the   distraction, the necessity of deep work,   the inherent bombardment of our   attention. Do you do you feel like you   saw the future earlier than what even at   the time maybe felt late with deep work   and focusing on quality over quantity   and stuff?   >> I mean, I think part of what I noticed   was the present was crazy to me and no   one else recognized it.

 So, it was less   even predicting the future. I I I feel   like there was a time, god, like 10   years ago now, where I was looking   around and yeah, saying two things. One,   social media doesn't make sense. Why are   we all pretending like this is at the   the center of democracy and civic life   and all business and we all have to be   on here all the time? And two, email   doesn't make sense.

 Not what was going   to happen in the future. I'm just like   looking at the way we're working today   with email and Slack and Teams was   coming. Like this completely does not   make sense. You're switching your   context once every two or three minutes.   this is a terrible way to actually use   your brain. So, I never thought of   myself as predicting the future as much   as just telling people what was going on   then didn't make sense.

 And everyone   thought I was crazy. And 10 years later,   it just kind of jumped from I was crazy   to it's common sense. So, it's not even   that interesting that I'm saying it   anymore. So, I kind of skipped the part   where   >> where it sounded precient.   >> Do you feel vindicated?   >> Um, I think certainly on a couple   issues.

 The social media issue was a big   one because I used to get a lot of flack   for that for for going out and I wasn't   even saying the social media was bad or   that no one should use it. Really, what   I was pushing back on was just the idea   of ubiquity, the idea that everyone had   to use it. I said, "This doesn't make   sense.

 I get there's some people this   makes sense for. There's a lot of   technologies that have markets that make   sense for it, but why is there this   pressure for everyone to be on these   services? This is not going to a good   place. They're they're spending a lot of   money to mine attention and they're   going to get better at it, right? And at   the time this was considered uh crazy.

  What do you mean like you wouldn't use   social media? I wrote a New York Times   oped back I looked this up the other   day. It was 2016.   And it argued   maybe social media is not the biggest   thing for a young person to focus on if   they're thinking about their career.   That's what it was.

 It was like focus on   your career instead of social media.   Actually doing things well is what   really matters. And you would think, you   know, that I had just come on and said   like, "America has an idea is done and   grandmother should be kicked." Like   people were upset about this. The New   York Times commissioned a response op-ed   two weeks later that was   >> that went through mine.

 I mean it and   said this is what is wrong about Cal   Newport's op-ed or whatever because it   made such a fear to suggest it. And   today it's it's boring to suggest like h   you know social media has problems and   most people probably shouldn't use it.   People agree with that. The one that   upsets me though, that one I feel like   people have come along to and more and   more people are being much more   selective and minimalist about their   social media.

 The distraction email,   Slack, constantly jumping back and forth   between different things.   >> That just got worse. I mean, I think   people recognize it now. This is   probably not a good way to work, but I   thought because there was dollars and   cents here, this is less productive from   an economic productivity standpoint to   have all of your workers changing their   attention all the time.

 you're just   getting a really low return on all the   money you're investing in these human   brains. So I thought, oh this is dollars   and cents. This is the one that's going   to change. Social media is fun. Like   that's going to be hard to change   people's behavior. But certainly this   hyperdistraction thing in knowledge work   that'll change because we're leaving   money on the table.

 It hasn't changed at   all. It's gotten worse. It's worse than   it was. It's I'm at the 10 year   anniversary now of the book deep work.   So this like this month is the 10 year   anniversary.   >> Congratulations, dude. That's [ __ ]   seinal. Like that that has become a part   of the lexicon. That's really really   cool.   >> Yeah.

 But it's it's got me a little bit   depressed because I've been doing this   10-year reflection like, okay, it's been   10 years and the book was a hit and it's   millions of copies, etc.   >> And that the issues I talked about are   worse. They're like really worse than   they were 10 years ago.   >> So people know the problem, nothing has   changed.

  >> What does the data suggest around the   worstness of it? Now   >> I've been the the one I've been   following the study that I think is   useful as a trend line is Microsoft   actually does this annual report where   they gather data from Microsoft 365. So   it's like Office and Word and PowerPoint   and Excel.

 Nowadays you use this sort of   the web-based version of these is very   common. So they can gather data from   just tens of thousands of knowledge   workers actually using all these   different the tools. And the latest   report they put out in 2025 now has the   interruptions on average once every two   minutes.   So, it's just gotten out of control.

 So,   switching to a communication tool once   every two minutes. They also found in   the latest report, and this is   depressing to me as well, there's one   time in the week where they see a   notable rise in the use of the   non-communication. So, actually using   the core productivity tools like Word or   PowerPoint and it's Saturday and Sunday   morning.

 So, we've just put the work off   until the weekend when there's no   expectations of responses and spend the   actual weekdays talking about work,   which I just don't get. Like, that is   not economically productive. Like,   companies are leaving money on the   table, but it's just where we are. We   really can't quit this behavior. Isn't   it interesting that you had to try and   appeal to a very utilitarian approach   for this? That you didn't say this is   probably making staff miserable.

 Uh,   it's not a good use of time. We've got   some really strong evidence that   suggests that doing one thing and   getting better at it over a protracted   period of time actually makes you feel   more satisfied. You get into a flow   state, etc., etc. You look back on your   day and you can look at the things that   you did.

 None of that, which is the much   more immediate experiential   uh way that people interface with   distraction. You tried to appeal to the   bottom line, which you thought, well,   incentives, incentives, a line of   [ __ ] incentives. Um, and that didn't   work, which obviously means also that   people's level of administrative burden   misery is also coming along for the ride   at the same time.

 Yeah, it's a it's a   [ __ ] mess, dude. And I think, you   know, even with what I do, it's not a   very big team, but Slack Slack is like   it's so useful   and   invites so much chaos at the same time.   It is. And was Slack? Slack wouldn't   have been that big during Deep Work. I'm   going to guess   >> it wasn't big. It wasn't out yet.

 I I   talk in deep work about these very early   instant messenger tools that no longer   exist like Hip Chat that was just   emerging among the programmer class. I   was basically saying there be dragons   like let's be careful about that. But I   wrote an article about Slack years later   uh when Slack was bought.

 So I think   Salesforce bought Slack. I wrote an   article about it for the New Yorker. And   I think the title of that article gets   to the core of the issue you're talking   about. The title was the Slack is the   right tool for the wrong way to work.   And I think what happened, here's my   whole theory on Slack, is that when   email arrived, it moved us to this new   style of collaboration that I call the   hyper hyperactive hive mind where we'll   just figure things out um on the go with   ad hoc back and forth, unscheduled   messaging, just sort of like shooting   messages back and forth. We'll figure   things out like we're all just kind of   connected all the time.   That's a terrible way to work for all   the reasons I talked about. It's   distracting. It's context switching. You   can't do anything deep. It's hard to   produce value. But if that's the way   you're going to work, email clients are   not a very good tool for that. You have   threads and it's clunky and it's hard to   search through your email and find what   you did before. So Slack came along and   said, "Look, if this is the way you're   going to work, hyperactive hive mind,   constant back and forth, ad hoc   coordination, we'll build you a better   tool for that." So that's why people

  both love and hate Slack. It's a really   good tool for that style of   collaboration. It works really well, but   that style of collaboration makes us   miserable. So, it's this weird lovehate   relationship we have. Like, this works   great. I hate the thing that it's making   easier.   >> Why does it why does it make us   miserable that style of collaboration?   >> Because our brain isn't meant to switch   our target of attention that quickly.

 It   just takes us a long time. If we're   talking about targets that are abstract   and symbolic, it takes us a long time to   switch from one to another. physical   world targets, we can switch quickly,   right? We're wired for that. If there's   a tiger's roar, I can boom, 100%   attention what's going on over there.

  But when we're thinking about abstract   things, information, ideas, things that   are symbolic and in our head, that's us.   We're basically uh reappropriating our   brain hardware to do something we're not   evolved to do. It takes a lot of effort   to do symbolic thinking, to think about   abstract concepts.

 And we know it takes   10 to 20 minutes to fully change our   attention context from one abstract   target to another. It takes a long time.   That's why if you sit down to write   something, everyone has this experience.   The first five or 10 minutes like, man,   this is terrible.   >> Like I I I'm making no progress or   whatever.

 And then after a while, you're   like, "Oh, this is starting to flow.   Like it's going better." That's because   it took that much time for your brain to   load up all of the relevant information   and to inhibit all the unrelated   circuits and get your brain really ready   to do that activity. So if you now   interrupt that brain once every two   minutes, it never can lock in on   anything and what you feel then is this   sort of diffuse cognitive friction that   we begin to experience as fatigue,   cognitive fatigue.

 And it's a really   frustrating experience. It's why if you   go to an email inbox, you're like, I   have time. I'm going to empty this   inbox. I'm going to go message by   message. Here's the best way to do it,   right? On paper, I'm going to go message   by message and I'm going to answer these   messages.

 Why does that get so hard? Why   do you find yourself like jumping around   and looking for easier messages? Because   each message is a different context in   the other and that's torture for the   brain. It's really really hard to go   from all right this is a complicated   question one of my employees is asking   me and now this is a completely   different issue completely unrelated to   that where I have to think of like a   good title for something and now here's   a completely different issue and you're   trying to switch one after another. Our   brains aren't wired for that. It really   makes us unhappy.   What would you say to someone who wants   to try and retrain that attention? Maybe   maybe they're they're going to try and   make some sort of a stand inside of   Slack and say, "I will only be available   at certain times of the day." But   regardless of the inbound, let's say   that they fix the inbound because that's   a totally separate problem. That's much   more sort of structural. Um, unless   you've got any advice for that as well.   But how how does someone go about

  re- appraising, retraining their mind   away from that? Because we be we do   become um we get like Stockholm   syndrome, the slack Stockholm syndrome   where our captor tormentor becomes the   way that we operate. We've got our   favorite little ways of working and it   feels like we've done but then at the   end of the day we look back and have   this sort of odd   malaise thing about well what did I   actually do today? What got what got   done? Well, not much not much got done.

  Yeah. Well, it's hard unilaterally if   you've changed nothing else about your   workload or your communication protocols   if you just say   uh I'm not going to be on Slack from   this hour to this hour. I only check my   email twice a day or whatever that   standard advice was from 15 years ago.   It doesn't work well because if you're   involved in a large number of projects   that are timely and the way progress is   going to be made is with ad hoc back and   forth messaging.

 You have to be in there   checking. That's the brutal part of the   hyperactive hive mind is that it has   defenses to its elimination built into   its very nature.   Because if this is how we're going to   figure this out, like we have to have   five or six back and forth messages to   figure out what we're going to do about   this client coming tomorrow and we have   to get this done today.

 That means you   have to see my next message right away   so that we have time for me to answer   you and you to answer me and for that   ping-pong match to happen. That means   you have to be checking your inbox or   Slack constantly. Otherwise, you're not   going to see my next message in time for   this whole game to unfold.

 So, the very   nature of that style of collaboration   demands constant inbox checking, which   is what I think people often get wrong   about this. When they think about things   like Slack or email, they think too   often about uh either information like,   "Oh, I've got so many messages in my   inbox that I don't need.

 I have all   these newsletters and spam." That's not   a problem. That's a minor problem.   That's an easily solvable problem. You   It's like clutter, you know? That's not   a big problem. Um, the issue is actually   my collaboration style requires me to be   in there because if I miss messages in a   timely fashion, everything falls apart.

  Yeah.   >> And so the issue is not how do I   interact with my inbox.   >> It really has to be how do I change the   way the inbox is being used. I I mean so   I ended up I like had three big ideas on   this that span three different books,   right? So um in deep work like one of   the big ideas was you can train your   personal ability to focus.

 Uh focusing   is really important putting aside for   now all the things trying to prevent you   from focusing you have to practice it   and if you practice it you'll get better   at it and if you get better at it you'll   be a superstar because like that's what   matters in the knowledge economy.   Everything good comes out of focus.

 Then   I wrote a book after that called a world   without email. And in that book I was   arguing uh the way we the thing I was   telling you about hyperactive high   communication is a problem. This is a   real problem. The fact that we are using   this method for coordination is causing   all these trouble is really causing   problems.

 And I went through all the   data and all the research and made the   case this is super non-productive. I   went back through the archives uh the   New York Times business session in the   80s and 90s to exactly document the rise   of email and how people were talking   about email when it first came onto the   business scene.

 And I made the case the   way we work is arbitrary. This   hyperactive highine was not a plan. It   wasn't seen to be more productive. We   stumbled into it. So we really should   change it. So that was that book. And   then the the most recent book slow   productivity from a couple years ago. In   that book I argued, oh wait a second,   workload matters too.

 The other issue of   this problem is we don't put any limits   or transparency on how many things we're   working on. And if you pile too many   things on your plate, too much   communication interruption becomes   unavoidable because they each have   little issues they need you to deal   with. So, so I've now over this 10-year   period have kind of broken down this   problem.

 There's like training yourself   to focus,   >> fixing your communication protocols,   like how do I communicate in a   professional context? How do we   collaborate? And then managing workload   to be more reasonable. All three of and   this might be why this problem's not   solved. There's no one thing to fix,   right? So all three of these things go   into the the issue.

 They're each   complicated.   >> What of across those three books, all of   which are great and everyone needs to go   and check out. I think we've done   episodes about each of them, so they can   just go and listen to those and then and   then buy the books. Um,   >> looking back across this portfolio of   productivity advice,   what have you heard from readers or what   has been the stickiest   strategies for you? you look back and   you go, "Okay, that's the 8020 of of of   what I've published over the last three   books.

"   >> To me, I think the the big two that give   you the biggest results, and I'll tell   you the one that's the hardest, and   that's why this book probably sold the   least. Um, the big two that gives you   the biggest results is taking focus   seriously like a skill. That really does   make a difference.

 Practicing focus, you   get better at it and it has a a   demonstraable   difference. you sit down to work and   you're just producing better stuff or   you're trying to pick up some   complicated new thing like oh god I can   learn this faster that makes a huge   difference um and then the second one   which was more recent in my life was oh   you really got to control the workload   so much is downstream from how many   things you've agreed to work on you have   to leave the mindset of everything I say   yes to brings with it value so saying   yes to more things is just going to   aggregate more value that's not the   right mindset that's not the way it's   it's a nonlinear uh you um reward   function there. There's a certain point   as you add more things. So, not only   does value stop growing, uh it begins to   go down on the other side and that   there's a real uh saying no to many more   things is actually a way to optimize   reward and output which is not natural.   Uh it doesn't make sense at first. It   doesn't feel like common sense. So,

  workload and focus training, you can   control those more than you think and   you're going to have huge results from   those. A quick aside. Do you remember   learning about the mighty mitochondria   back in grade school? Here's a quick   refresher. It's the tiny engine inside   of your cells that powers everything you   do.

 But here's what they didn't teach   you. As you age, your mitochondria break   down. That's what can cause you to feel   tired more often, take longer to   recover, and wake up feeling like you're   never fully recharged, no matter how   long you sleep. I started taking   Timeline nearly 2 years ago because it   is the best product on the market for   mitochondrial health.

 And that is why I   partnered with them. Timeline is the   number one doctor recommended   uraliththin a supplement with a compound   called mitoure. Basically, it helps your   body clear out damaged mitochondria and   replace them with new ones. Mitoure is   backed by over 15 years of research,   over 50 patents, and nearly a dozen   human clinical trials.

 It was   recommended to me by my doctor, and that   is why I've used it for so long, since   way before I knew who even made the   product. And best of all, there's a   30-day money back guarantee, plus free   shipping in the US. and they ship   internationally. So, right now you can   get a free sample or get up to 20% off   by going to the link in the description   below or heading to   timeline.com/modernwisdom.

  That's timeline.com/modernwisdom.   The learning to say no thing is   interesting, especially as people   progress inside of their career and they   get better at what they're doing. They   have to learn to be able to say no to   opportunities that they would have only   begged to have had the opportunity to be   in the room to have maybe said yes to   >> Yeah.

  >> only half a decade ago.   >> Yeah.   >> In that time, you've had to go from   needing that opportunity to actively   being able to say no to something that's   probably better than it. Uh Alex, my   friend, taught me about, you remember,   uh in the Matrix, the woman with the red   dress, and Neo turns around and he says,   "Were you looking at me? We looking at   the woman in the red dress. Look again.

"   and it's an agent with a gun in his   face. And the analogy that Alex used   was, "And now imagine that she's not a   10 out of 10, but imagine a thousand   hypothetical 1,000s out of 10." And you   need to be able to say no to them, which   previously you didn't even know existed.   So this I think the kind of um   it's almost like reverse entropy or   habituation.

 you know, your   opportunities get better, which means   that your capacity to say no needs to   get better more quickly than that. You   can't be chasing your tail trying to   learn to be able to say no less quickly   than the opportunities get more   seductive.   >> Yeah. It's almost perverse uh the way   that works.

 It's like when you have all   the time in the world, all you want is   opportunities. And then when you have   opportunities, all you want is all the   time in the world. I had to change I   don't know what you do but I had to   change my rule at some point. This was   hard for me to the default no like   that's just how I have to operate now it   because as soon as you try to have a   triage rule well look I'm not going to   do this opportunity unless I only do   speaking gigs that have this much money   or this or I only going to go meet with   someone if they're like this interesting   or this or that.   >> Eventually the number of things that   satisfy that criteria overwhelms you   just as well. It's just so I've I I've   just had to fall back on the default.   No,   >> you're you're talking to somebody who   came back from a two-day trip to Qatar   at the start of this week. So, I spent   as much time traveling as I did in the   country to to give a talk. And as I   looked around, there was this first the   first night dinner. There was maybe 300

  people there. And I'm talking to Logan   Paul and Steven Bartlett's over his   shoulder. And the CEO of Qatar Airways   is here. in the Middle Eastern director   for meta over there. And I was looking   around thinking, everybody here wants to   be here. It's very exciting. Everyone's   really lovely.

 But also, everyone here   can't say no. Everybody in this room is   chronically incapable of saying no   because   >> I've said no to this one several times,   by the way. I the amount of invites to   the the Qatar and the UAE and other   places. I have I have said no to   >> All right. Well, consider me a [ __ ]   consider a [ __ ] compared to you, Cal.

  Whatever. Whatever it I must be easy an   easy booty call. They tried to get Cal   Newport. We couldn't get Cal. So, we'll   ring Chris instead.   >> The default. No. Oh, man. Yeah. It's   It's crazy the things you end up saying   no to after a while. But that I mean   there's a currency shift for me. Time to   think is such a valuable that's a more   valuable currency than money, right? You   get to a point where you're like, "Oh,   I'm doing fine, but if I don't have time   to think, what's the point?" And then   that becomes this like really rare   currency that's that's much harder to   get a hold of. And that's the only way I   can protect it now is anything that   requires me to like go somewhere. It's a   default. No. And then I can talk myself   out of it later, right? I'm like, you   know what? I could bring my family with   it. We could have a trip, right? So,   actually, you know what? I I will do   this or uh you know, I just did a had a   masterclass course released um this   week. I spent a year and a half saying   no to that. And then like eventually I   sort of talked myself I talked to some   people   >> uh they're like we'll come to DC to do   it. I talked to you know James Clear had

  just done one and I had a good talk with   him about it and I was like you know   what this is this will be interesting   and it took me a year and a half. Um but   I finally talked myself into it. So I   will say yes but it just the default no   means that you don't have to   >> high standards.   >> Yeah.

 You don't have to run it through   the ringer and then you're like okay if   it really sticks with me then maybe I'll   be like all right I'll do it.   >> How much should people actually be   working?   Well, it depends what you mean by work   and what they're doing, right? Because   think about it. Let's say you're an   athlete. It's super well defined.

 Like   here's optimal training. Here's optimal   rest and like that's what you should be   doing. Like you the that's really clear.   We don't have those limits as clear in   the culture for other types of jobs that   we probably should. If you're at a high   wage hourly build job, like a law   partner at a big law firm, there the   economic model is the more you work, the   more profitable it is.

 And we'll we'll   pay you big money to do this, but like   you should basically work as much as you   can that your body will take it. That's   the economic engine there. That's why I   think those jobs are those jobs are   scary. If you're a novelist that writes   literary fiction, so you're like, I   really need to be award nominated for   each book or I'm going to fall out of   this like slipstream of because no one's   going to read these books unless they're   some of the best books.

  >> Then you should be doing like four hours   in the morning and then just disappear,   right? Like you should be doing very   little more work than that because   almost anything else will get in the way   of you like sticking in that position.   And so it all just depends on what on   what you do, you know?   Didn't you look at some experiment of   shorter work weeks?   >> Yeah.

  >> What what did you learn from that?   >> There's a lot of these right around the   pandemic right before and then right   after in Europe and Iceland. So some   European studies I think Germany did   one, Iceland did one, UK did one and   they were looking at four day work   weeks.

 So what would happen if we take   away one one day? The interesting thing   about those experiments is what they   found is the whatever measures of   productivity they came up with uh they   didn't get worse which I thought was   very interesting. They took a day away   and yet the perceived productivity or   the measured productivity didn't go   down.

 And there's there's two ways to   look at it. The one way to look at it is   to say, "Oh, this means that like we   should have a 4-day work week because it   things didn't get worse and okay, maybe   maybe right, but to me there's like a   bigger observation that came out of   that, which is like, wait, so what were   we what are we doing during the work   days?" Like this there's something going   on here that should really catch our   attention.

 What does work mean that we   could take an entire day off the table   with no other preparation and the the   valuable stuff being produced doesn't   change? This tells us that like whatever   we're doing while we're sitting here in   work is not just sitting down and trying   to produce value. We're clearly have all   sorts of other sorts of distractions   going on.

 Uh context switching, time   that's being devoured, Parkinson's law   is at play. Uh work must be broke. To   me, that was the more important   observation is that like if you can take   away a day and nothing changes, then I   don't think we're doing in the office   what we think we're doing in the office.   >> Parkinson's law was on the tip of my   tongue.

 Work expands to fill the time   given for it. And if you give people 5   days, they'll take five. And if you give   them 4 days, then they'll do it in four.   And and look,   everybody knows just how much time they   waste not doing the work, not doing the   thing that they're supposed to do. And   this isn't victim blaming. This is a lot   of the time dealing with admin   unnecessary meetings.

 You can't get out   of them. You have to be there for   whatever reason. So it's not as if it's   bottom up. A lot of it is top down   dictated. this is the environment that   you work in and you have to do this. But   even outside of that, when you do have   your 1 hour in between meetings, your   inability to not I I remember I used   when I used to run nightclubs and I get   in at 2:30 in the morning.

 The final   part of the night was cashing the till.   So this was before we switched to   tickets, which was sort of the late   teens, just before co uh digital tickets   online, which meant that you didn't have   to cash as much money in the till. Uh   but before that it was all you know5   and10 note and 20 pound notes and single   pounds and all the rest of it and I   would go into the office with the   manager of the venue and we would be   counting the money.

 But this is the   final task the final bit of the night.   It's [ __ ] 2:15 or 2:30 in the   morning. We've just taken the taken the   till off as it's called. Anybody that's   coming in doesn't get to come in blah   blah and we're not going to take any   more money. And I'm sat up there doing   like light lift mental arithmetic, but   for me, somebody who hadn't done math   since I was 16, it was a relatively   heavy lift, flicking through the money,   flicking through the money.

 It was   light, you know, huge fluorescent   overhead lights just before. And then I   get to drive home and I'm like thinking   about and I got to go put the money in   the tilt and I got to write it in the   the spreadsheet and then I get into bed.   And as I go into bed, my eyes below my   eyelids would start flicking left and   right. I wouldn't be able to tune.

 I'm   also doing this. Let's not forget in a   sweaty beer stinking office above a room   going.   Yeah. I've had to walk through the club.   I've had to shout at the the hostesses.   One of them's getting fingered on the   dance floor. Stop doing that. You're   supposed to be at work. The DJ's pissed.   I need to, you know, it's chaos.

 And   I've tried to coordinate this orchestra   of [ __ ] And then I've had to do   mental arithmetic. And then I get to   drive home. And then I'm like, okay,   chill out, brain. It doesn't want to.   And that eyes moving left and right   thing I think is the sort of   >> optical equivalent, ocular equivalent of   how people feel when they finally get a   moment. Oh, okay.

 All of my stuff is   done. And then they try and sit down to   work on the thing that ostensibly   they're actually there to do, right?   Because all of the other [ __ ] the   meetings, you're not there to do the   meetings, you're not there to do the   Slack, you're not there to do, all of   that is foreplay to get you to do the   thing that you're there to do.

 And then   you sit down to do the thing you're   there to do and your eyes are moving   behind your eyelids is the equivalent.   You're swiping and moving across the   screen and you've got a few different   other well I'll just check on this   thing. Like what the living [ __ ] is   going on? I've like trained the   environment that I work in has trained   me out of being able to do my work.

  Well, it it we are meant to do like what   would be the ideal workday in an office   environment that would actually mask the   human brain? It would probably be you   come in, you work on something hard for   a while like that's what you do in the   morning, you have lunch and then you   like catch up with have some meetings,   talk to some people, hey, what's going   on? And and you know do some task and   that's your day.

 Like that's basically   what we can do like two things. one big   burst of like let me focus on something   hard and then we can kind of come down   the mountain after that with let me chat   with people what's going on some   decisions need to be made or whatever   that's probably about optimal instead we   juggle a dozen to two dozen tasks that   all have their own demands they all have   their own communication needs uh this is   why the Microsoft data shows oh the work   happens the Saturday and Sunday morning   it is really hard you can't go from and   meetings are very hard as well we think   like oh I'm not actually doing work   during meetings But what you are   engaging in a meeting is all the parts   of your brain that deal with social   interaction. And those are a large part   of your brain. And that is a fraught and   mental energy consuming activity to sit   in a room or on a Zoom screen and try to   manage all these different people and   how do I look and what am I saying and   what's going on here and I have to say   the right things. It's draining and you   come out of something like that, it's   difficult just to jump right back into

  something else. And if you come out of   something like that and there was a lot   of obligations generated, oh, we   discussed in this meeting things I need   to do and now you try to go straight   from that meeting into another. Well,   now that's really in the back of your   head.

 What about this? What about this?   We can't forget this. We just made our   obligations. That that feeling of   fatigue. It's a it's a really is fatigue   is what it feels like. A mental fatigue   like there's a sand in your brain. Sand   in the gears of your brain. That's the   state that a lot of people who work in   front of a computer screen like that's   the state they're in most of the day.

  and they don't even realize, oh, that's   a bad feeling. That's a negative state.   That's that's not how it needs to feel   because you have nothing else to compare   it to. Yeah. The amount of things we're   doing, the amount we're trying to switch   back and forth. I always thought that   part of the problem was a lot of our   current thought about work culture and   hustling and what it means to produce   was influenced by Silicon Valley in the   90s and 2000s because that was   considered this very um ascendant part   of the economy you know through the   2000s through the Steve Job era we   looked at Silicon Valley these are the   coolest companies they're doing all the   coolest stuff over there I think they   adopted a model of work that was very   inspired by computer processors Right.   So because that was what was in the air   in the 80s and 90s in Silicon Valley was   the computer processor worse. You know   the 386 versus the 486 versus the   Pentium. And it was all about speed. And   the thing with a computer processor if   you're a computer type what matters is

  uh you never want the pipeline to be   empty, right? You want to always make   sure you have stuff for that processor   to do so. So it never wastes time. The   processor will every command you give   it, it operates the same as any other.   It can switch. It doesn't care what they   are.

 It just sits there and operates one   command after another. And the whole   game with getting processors to be   effective is like don't have downtime.   Like the real fear, I can put on my   computer scientist hat for a second. The   real fear in computer processor design   is that you sometimes get to a command   that's going to generate a huge delay.

  So you say like, oh, go get something   from memory. Uh that takes a lot of time   from the perspective like a computer   processor cycle. It's just sitting there   cycle after cycle doing nothing while   you're waiting for the memory bus or   whatever. So we invented these processor   pipelines like oh while we're waiting to   get something back from memory here's   some other stuff the processor can run   so that it's never not working and the   idea was you want to move as fast as   possible and you never want to have   downtime and that's how you get the most   out of a computer processor. The human   brain is like 180 degrees different. We   can't just switch back and forth between   unrelated commands. You switch me from   one to another thing and boom 30 minutes   of my mind is fried. Humans operate very   differently. But I think Silicon Valley   associated it said here's the thing   we're going to associate with being   really good at your job. It might have   used I don't know your skill. It was uh   Don Draper and Madman. Remember that   conception of of what does it mean to be   good at your job? They weren't showing   Don Draper grinding it out like man Don   Draper is like in the office till you

  know 3:00 a.m. every night or whatever.   Now he took the five o'clock train back   to you know Connecticut or whatever. It   was he he was really really good at   coming up with ad copy. He was good at   what he did. That's what you used to   respect. And then after the 80s, 90s,   Silicon Valley became pervasive.

 Like,   no, what matters is you never have a   noop. You never have a down cycle. You   might as well say yes to more things.   You might as well get more emails. You   never have time or you're not working.   That's what productivity is going to be.   And that was a disaster for the human   brain.

 If you struggle to stay asleep   because your body gets too hot or too   cold, this is going to help. Eight just   released their brand new Pod 5, which   includes the world's first temperature   regulating duvet. Compare it their smart   mattress cover, which cools or warms   each side of the bed by up to 20°, and   you've got a climate controlled cocoon   built for deep, uninterrupted rest.

 The   new base even comes with a built-in   speaker so you can fall asleep to white   noise, nature sounds, or a little   ambient Taylor Swift if that's your   thing. And it's got upgraded biometric   sensors that quietly run health checks   every night, spotting patterns like   abnormal heartbeats, disrupted   breathing, or sudden changes in HRV.

  Which is why it has been clinically   proven to increase total sleep by up to   1 hour every night. Best of all, they've   got a 30-day sleep trial, so you can buy   it and sleep on it for 29 nights. And if   you don't like it, they will give you   your money back. Plus, they ship   internationally.

 Right now, you can get   up to $350 off the pod 5 by going to the   link in the description below or heading   to eightsleep.com/modernwisdomdom   using the code modernwisdom a checkout.   That's ei.com/modernwisdism   and modernwisdom a checkout.   There's definitely an element of this   that it's very   public productivity. It's very obvious.

  Look at how hard I'm working. Right? If   you're the one that replies quickest on   Slack or on email, then it's evident   that you're the one. It looks like   you're the one that's working hardest   because you're the one that's most   responsive. Whereas the person who's   silently working on their own, they   can't broadcast it by design.

 They can't   broadcast it to everybody else. So yeah,   this uh um obvious productivity in a way   is way less sexy. So I think you know   the new elephant in the room is AI and   how that is   enabling an increase in pace   uh of output but almost certainly a   decrease in quality. So   fold AI into your existing   world view because to me it just seems   like a huge force multiplier for what   already was pretty sloppy.

 Slack, email,   async communication that's always on,   people taking their work home with them,   never being able to not context switch,   not focusing on quality and instead   focusing on quantity, not being able to   to dial themselves in to do deep work   for one moment. And now   that is   enhanced and magnified even more by the   use of LLMs to help you put out more, to   help you think less.

 So your focus is   actually you're you're in Slack with   your LLM. It wouldn't surprise me if   there is a LLM integration into Slack at   some point in future. I don't know   whether there is um where you can just   do it in there. So you're just talking   back and forth in one [ __ ] workspace.   Talk to me. Fold AI into this.

 You must   have a million thoughts. Oh, there's a   lot going on with AI. Uh, I mean, I   think in its current instantiation, so   we think about like an office worker for   the most part put programmers aside.   I'll get back to them, but   non-programmers are really interact with   chatbots. Like, that's the main way   they're integrating right now with AI.

  It's exagger exactly what you said. For   a lot of people, it's exaggerating the   problems that already exist. Now,   there's a term for this that comes out   of a Harvard Business Review article   from last year. They call it work slop   they put together as one word and they   have some pretty compelling data on it.

  >> So what's work? Define work slop for me.   >> So work slop is AI generated work   products in the knowledge work sector.   So like emails, reports and powerpoints   or what have you that are generated   quickly by AI but they're so low quality   that they actually it's very difficult   that they make everyone else's jobs   harder.

 This seems to be this is like   the defining aspect of work slob. that's   quick to produce, but it's so low value   that it actually no real progress is   made. So, like you get a work slop email   from, you know, your boss or whatever,   and like this isn't useful to me. It's   this weird wordy thing that's broken up   into sections and it doesn't get to the   core of the problem we have to solve.

  So, you made that email quick, but in   the bigger uh scheme of things, we made   very little progress towards uh what we   want to do. or you put together a work   slot PowerPoint presentation so that you   would have something at the meeting but   now we're spending 20 minutes looking at   this nonsense and nothing it's not   helping us it's not helping us actually   do things so this is what's happening or   at least my fear I mean the reality is   most people aren't using these tools in   the office uh I let's just set the   reality right so but for the people who   are using them right now um which is a   healthy percentage but it's not   >> you know what the numbers are   >> well it's difficult because there's a   lot of fudging of the numbers here   there's a lot of mistaking taking have   used or experimented with with are   regularly using them. So I see this   mistake happen a lot um and so it's   difficult to get good numbers. There   there was like famously um maybe it was   an Ethan Malik article where he was   talking about in my world like academia   the homework apocalypse and he's like   look at this study students just don't   do work anymore. Nine out of 10 are just

  using chatbots now. But you look at that   study and what it actually said was nine   out of 10 had tried using a chatbot at   least once and if you looked at who's   using them regularly it was like two out   of 10 right because like for most of the   students it was wasn't helping them the   way they thought it would.

 So I don't   know what the numbers are. Um, if you   count like advanced Google use, I think   it's larger. Like, yeah, I searched for   information on this instead of going to   Google, that's larger. But in terms of   people who are actually making office   work product out of it, I think it's   smaller   >> than the people who follow AI commentary   or talk about it on AI Twitter, AI   YouTube, I think it's a lot smaller than   they probably assume just because in   their world, it's pervasive.

 But the   people who are using it, this is the   problem, uh, they're trying to avoid.   This is my theory on this is like what   how is AI helping like an office worker   now? Well, their brain is exhausted from   all this context switching.   >> So, what problem are they looking to   solve?   >> They're looking to avoid having to do   hard moments of cognition because their   brain is so fried.

  >> It's really difficult to like solve the   blank page problem. Oh god, I got to   send this email. I got to it's a blank   screen. I got to start writing from   scratch. That's really hard. Yeah.   the inertia that they've been trained   out of overcoming because of the primer.   It's almost like a a one-two punch.

  >> Yeah.   >> Humans were primed to not like heavy co   Well, we already didn't like heavy   cognitive load. Then our ability to deal   with it and get through that initial   resistance was decreased through the   context switching. And now we're don't   worry about it. Don't worry about don't   worry about it.

 Carbon based life forms,   the siliconbased life forms are coming.   And let's throw in one uh one one other   aspect in there also. Outside of work,   we had these distraction machines in our   hand that were further degrading our   comfort with concentration because any   possible moment of introspection we   would have had even outside of work.

 Why   would I do that when Tik Tok has like   the perfect dash cam video of you know a   Karen getting punched or something like   I got to watch that right?   >> Uh and so we've we we have that   revolution comes along plus the email   revolution. We completely atrophy our   ability to think and we exhaust our   brain.

 The other aspect of it as we   talked about it's really exhausting to   go through your day   >> context switching. So like I don't have   any reserves left to write this   PowerPoint. That seems impossible. And   then AI is like hey I can do it for you.   It'll be fine. It'll be fine. It'll be   good enough. It'll be good enough.   You're like oh okay I can smooth over I   use this analogy in a New Yorker piece   last year.

 It's like it takes your   effort graph looks like spikes like an   EKG or something like that and AI   smooths over those peaks and so you   don't have to your peak concentration   required can come down like well you can   fill the blank page and then maybe I   have to work with it a little bit that's   easier than doing it from scratch but   the stuff being produced is no good and   so I feel like work slop it's almost   less of a uh it's less of a um critique   of AI than it is AI making obvious a   problem with the way we were already   working. I think that's what's going on   there. I think this is even happening   with computer programmers. This is   considered, you know, heretical right   now, but I guess I'm used to being   yelled at. Uh people are really excited   by this workflow where I have seven or   eight cloud code agents going   concurrently producing code and testing   them and I'm just a manager of all these   different processes and they're all   producing this code on my behalf and it   feels really cool and interesting like

  this has to be the future. I don't know   that that is I mean I don't know the   context. The problem is outside of like   demos or internal tools or just having   fun, that's not really code you can   trust very well. And it it does though   completely lower the peaks of being a   computer programmer, those peaks of   cognition.

 It's much much easier to   manage a bunch of clawed code processes   than it is to come up with an algorithm.   And you have that same blank page. So   I'm I think the jury is still out on   even where we're going to end up in the   AI impact on programming. I don't know   where it's going to end up, but the way   it's being talked about in the last few   months after the latest Cloud Code uh   update, which is sort of I guess that's   something humans don't do anymore.

  >> I don't think we're there ready to say   that yet. I get popped with Claude Code   ads. I get I I you give me a terminal, I   have no idea what to do. I'm like I'm   like, you know, someone's grandmother   trying to use an iPad. I have no idea   what's going on. So, they are pushing   very very hard at the moment for this.

  It's it's kind it's funny but it's a   little bit crazy but it's my world right   I'm computer scientist is that uh for   engineer computer scientist types they   they forget how technically advanced   they are. So yeah, cloud code uh works   in the terminal, right? And that's why   it works so well.

 It exists in a world   of text only text command line commands   like the old DOS command line. It's all   text commands um which you can do a lot   with. You can create and edit and   compile computer programs. So it's very   good at that. And it's a limited set of   textual commands. That's perfect for a   language model.

 Um and the engineers are   like, oh, we can use this terminalbased   tool to do all sorts of other stuff   that's not computer programming. Great.   This is the pro. this has solved the   pro. Everyone's going to be doing this.   Everyone is going to have these sort of   personal assistance based on something   on cloud code.

 I'm like, man, do you   realize how foreign a command line   interface is to people? You realize like   how weird and nerdy and complicated your   world is? You're like, yeah, this will   be great. My grandma will just on the   command line understand that like the   cloud code agent can bring up a bash   script that's just going to cat those   files over to the the regx GP, you know,   and it'll be fine.

 They don't no one   knows how to do any of that type of   stuff. So, it's sort of funny seeing the   engineers building these incredibly   intricate, nerdy, wonderful tools   they've customuilt for cloud code to   help them in their life and they think   the gap between that and everyone else   having AI automate things in their life   is like, "Oh, it's this real small   thing." I'm like, "Oh, man.

 I don't   think you understand." I mean, people   are still not quite sure about the right   click. I think you got you still have a   ways to go before they're   >> I see this uh I I saw this this tweet uh   from Robert Frlaw   uh lawyer uses chat GPT to help write a   brief chat GPT hallucinates cases in   quotations court sanctions lawyer and   four co-consel for not catching the   errors the lawyer who used chat GPT has   practiced for over 30 years he prompted   prompted chhat GPT write an order that   denies the motion to strike with case   law support told the court he doesn't   normally use chacht and he used it this   time cuz he was caring for his dying   family members said no of his co-consil   were aware of this use of generative AI   course says that because all five   attorneys signed both documents that   included these errors and they admit   that not one of them verified that the   case law in those briefs actually exist   their conduct violates rule 11b2   there's hundreds of those happening   right I I heard I don't know where this

  site is there's a site that tracks this   lawyers getting busted for chat GPT   written briefs that just make things   because it will for sure make up things   if you ask it because again what it   tries to do is you know not to get   people know this but right at the very   bottom what is a language model trying   to do is trying to solve the word   guessing game that's how it was trained   it was given real text you knock out a   word and say replace that word can you   figure out what word was really there in   the real text so the language models   just think they're trying to expand a   real text that really existed so they're   trying to produce text that makes sense   given the prompt They're not there's not   world models or structured reasoning in   there of like, okay, this is a legal   brief and we have a notion of a   citation. Uh we don't know how it thinks   about that. There's hundreds and   hundreds of cases of this happening. I   heard Scott Galloway talk about this on   the Pivot podcast that he track there's   some site that tracks this that he keeps   an eye on and he says it astounds you.   You think it's a handful of people. It's   not. It's all the time. I got here's my

  story of getting burned by that. I sort   of learned my lesson. I was working on   uh because the the the one way I'll use   chat GPT is just sometimes instead of   Google, right? Um especially if I'm if I   want like instructions for how to   whatever change settings on something.   It's great.

 It has a lot of really   useful   >> spectacular for all of that stuff. If   you want to use it as basically a   glorified Wikipedia that's more   instructive like   >> Yeah. Yeah. And you could like Wikipedia   you can ask questions of Yeah. So, so,   um, I was using I was writing a an essay   and it was on Isaac Azimov's, um, Rules   of Robotics.

 This was a a New Yorker   essay. And, um, I left my copy of iRoot.   I was here in my studio and I left it at   home. I was like, "Oh, I needed to add   this quote, right? Uh, I left it and I   was like, "Oh, you know what? That that   story is in the public domain. It's all   over the internet." And this seems like   it would be perfect for chat GPT.

 like,   "Hey, can you just grab a copy and find   me that quote and that'll save me a   little bit of time?" Like, "Yeah, here   it is. Here's the quote." I was like,   "Yeah, it's best roughly I remember I   put in put in there." And then the fact   checker was like, "Where's this quote   from?" I like, "Yeah, it's from the   story or whatever." I get the book.

 It   had just hallucinated a quote that was   more or less like what was said, right?   Because again, it's kind of playing the   game of this is the type of text that   would make sense giving the prompt, but   it wasn't the actual quote. it had full   access to it, right? You can search   this. It's in the public domain.

 So that   the actual story is everywhere. So I had   just naively assumed if you ask it for   some information that exists on the   internet that oh it'll just go find it   and format it for you. Uh it didn't. And   then I went through a whole dialogue   with it where I was like this is not the   right quote.

 And it's like yeah you're   right. You know what I thought you meant   paraphrase a quote. Here it is made up.   I was like that's not the real quote.   Can you go get the real quote and give   it? At this point I was just   experimenting. I'd already filled it in   the article and like you're right, you   know, I was being hasty. Here you go.

 I   could not get it to give me the real   quote. So anyways, so I I learned my   lesson. I was like, oh, don't assume   even if it's common information that it   has access to.   >> Dude, the desire the desire to [ __ ]   reprimand an LLM. And I I've shouted at   them a capital letter exclamation marks.   It's like, what what are you doing? What   are you do is what what what are you   hoping to achieve by throwing your   emotional distress at this [ __ ]   disembodied voice on the other side?   Okay, we bit aside. I [ __ ] love Chip   PT. I think it's been really really   fantastic for tons of things.   >> It What's important is learning the   limits and not using it for case law. Um   this episode is brought to you by Whoop.   I have been wearing Whoop for over 5   years now. Way before they were a   partner on the show. I've actually   tracked over 1,600 days of my life with   it, according to the app, which is   insane. And it's the only wearable I've   ever stuck with because it tracks

  everything that matters. Sleep,   workouts, recovery, breathing, heart   rate, even your steps. And the new 5.0   is the best version. You get all the   benefits that make Whoop indispensable.   7% smaller, but now it's also got a   14day battery life and has health span   to track your habits, how they affect   your pace of aging.

 It's got hormonal   insights for ladies. I'm a huge, huge   fan of Whoop. That's why it's the only   wearable that I've ever stuck with. And   best of all, you can join for free. Pay   nothing for the brand new Whoop 5.0   strap. Plus, you get your first month   for free. And there's a 30-day money   back guarantee.

 So, you can buy it for   free, try it for free. If you do not   like it after 29 days, they just give   you your money back. Right now, you can   get the brand new Whoop 5.0 and that   30-day trial by going to the link in the   description below or heading to   join.woop.com/modernwisdom.   That's join.woop.com/modernwisdom.   What opportunities do you think an   increasing reliance on AI opens up?   because I I get the sense that as more   people use LLMs to do the work for them,   this will create advantages in some   areas for people who don't need to be   reliant. So, have you thought about the   the holes market openings that have will   occur?   >> It will. I mean, the way I think about   LLM based AI versus more advanced AI   that we don't know how to do yet is, you   know, my theory is the what is being   affected is going to be more narrow at   first. It's going to be places where   there's an exact match between what   generative AI existing tools can do um

  and existing uh market sectors. We saw   this actually the week we're recording   this, we actually saw this reflected in   the stock market. There was this   interesting paradox that was going on   this week where the stock price of   software companies that deal with stuff   that is well suited for an LLM went   down.

 There there was they call it the   the the SAS apocalypse, right? The   software service apocalypse. So um you   know companies that do like legal advice   uh companies that do graphic design like   Figma and Adobe because a lot you know   we have generative image generation is   making building images from scratch is   less useful uh customer service.

 So   companies that do a lot of customer   service type software. We saw the stock   was sliding on these very specific   software industries because like look I   think LLMs are going to be able to do   this. It was triggered by Anthropic   releasing some plugins that made it   easier to integrate LLMs into your   services without having to hire these   other companies.

  >> But you would think that's would be good   news for the big tech companies building   the AI that's going to replace all this.   >> Their stock was sliding as well.   >> And so the big tech companies had this   big slide that at the end of the week   we're recording this, there was a   rebound at the end, but it was like a   trillion dollars in market cap   disappeared from the the big tech   companies at the same time.

 So what does   that mean the market was betting on?   what are investors betting on at that   point what was going to happen and they   were betting that in the near future the   next year or two what we're going to see   is uh se selective impacts in specific   fields from generative AI but also that   too much money is being invested in   these AI companies uh as it uh already   which means they're betting that they're   not about to automate most of the   economy they're not about to you know   just one more iteration away from a huge   economic disruption they're not they're   not uh at this peak of like complete   transformation because if they were you   would be trying to increase your   holdings in these companies like I don't   care how much money they're investing   these companies are going to be worth an   astronomical amount of money but the   market is betting I think the impact is   going to be more limited in the 1 to   twoyear window than uh a lot of the   commentary was seen so I I think that's   important because talk is cheap but tech   stocks aren't and so people the way they

  spend their money actually often has   more of I think there's a lot of   information in that versus just I've   been reading these articles online and   my god the vibe really seems to be   saying this is a big deal. Uh so that's   I kind of agree with the market's   consensus right now for sure there's   going to be industries that are affected   but it's not going to be one of these   situations where you say okay any work   that's not just the deepest creative   work is all going to be automated the   next few years I better go learn how to   like do art or something like that. I   don't think it's going to be that broad   at first. I don't think the current   generation of AI technology can support   as broad of impacts as people think.   There's a lot of extrapolation from   well, if it can do this with code,   >> certainly it could do this with all   these other jobs. If it could do this   with this industry, well, certainly next   it'll do it for all these other   industries. We have to be wary of those   extrapolations,   >> right? You you I think I read an article   from you. What if AI doesn't get much   better than this? Yeah. sort of if we   have I don't know some sort of Flynn   effect thing that kicks in but for AI   where

  you know because I think a lot of people   would agree chatt2 to three [ __ ] hell   to four 40 I know is this there's a   whole fur on the internet about people   that have got girlfriends or boyfriends   that are virtual on 40 and they're all   getting upset and sad about it uh and I   don't understand I don't think I use the   tools sufficiently deeply to be able to   test this and benchmark market.

 It's   like my Fire TV Sticks remote isn't   working well. Um like it was able to do   that [ __ ] 5 years ago. Um but is your   your thinking is that we're maybe going   to reach asimtote for what LLMs   generally and transformer technology is   able to do and then it's going to be a   new architecture entirely if we're going   to actually get beyond this.

  >> Yes. Yeah. That's what that article was   about. I think that was a very of the   articles I've written, I think that was   a really important one that that came   out um in August. And the and the story   it tells and a lot of other people have   told the story as well, you know, around   that time and since, but the story it   tells is basically what happened is   there was this big paper that was   published in 2020.

 The lead researcher   Kaplan, Jared Kaplan, I think was at   Anthropic at the time and it was this   paper where they said, "Hey, something   weird is happening here. If we make LLMs   bigger and we train them longer, they   perform better." And technically they're   saying the loss decreased. That sounds   kind of obvious but in like machine   learning circles that was surprising   because there's this idea of overfitting   where if you just make your model bigger   um the performance goes down.

 So it used   to be like you have to find the perfect   size model for your problem space.   That's the way people thought about   machine learning until this paper came   out like I don't know transformbased   LLMs uh they were using GPT2 and they   were systematically making it bigger and   they were seeing that the performance   just kept going up.

 like this is   interesting so let's try it and that was   GPT3 all right let's actually make this   like 10x bigger surely this can't be   right and it was it matched the Kaplan   curve exactly like oh my god this   actually got way better just by making   this bigger like all right well   certainly that must be the end of it   let's try it with GPT4 they made it   bigger they trained it much longer   months and months they trained it you   know Microsoft had to build these custom   data centers to train it with new AC   technology didn't exist before and it   fit the curve it was like way better.   And the thing GPT4 did that really got   so GPT4 set off the whole industry. The   thing it did is it started showing   abilities beyond just language. And   that's where people got excited like, oh   wow, if you train a language model on   enough language,   it learns about things that isn't just   producing language. It can play games.   It can do math problems. It can do   logic. I mean, this was super exciting.   It was super exciting. So the assumption

  was do this two or three more times you   have AGI. So that's what the whole   industry was based off of when we went   from three to four was this is   legitimate justified excitement.   >> Expand the size and the training   duration two or three more times and the   economy is going to happen in a box. I   mean it was so that's where all of that   was the the engine for all this   excitement.

 So they tried uh at OpenAI   was called Project Orion. They made it   bigger modeled than four. They trained   it even longer. Like here we go. And   they tried it and they said it's not   much better. And this was this big uh   brick wall surprise for the industry.   Like wait, it didn't get better. Um   everyone else tried as well, right?   Grock, they tried this with Grock as   well with the Colossus data center.

 Like   we're going to have 200,000   GPU data center. No one's ever built   anything this big. And it was like a   little bit better. Meta tried this. They   had a model called Bmoth like we built   the biggest data is bigger than anyone   we've had before and they didn't release   it because it was marginally better than   the last model that they had.

 And so   this was a huge issue, right? You   couldn't just make the models bigger and   train them bigger. So what they did was   they switched to what are other ways we   can get uh performance increases and can   we get more narrow by what we mean with   performance and this is when we began to   get all the alphabet suit models.

 Well,   it's GPTO 03- mini whatever. Uh, and   they switched the focus from just this   is amazing if you use it to we have   these benchmark graphs and look at these   graphs. Things are going better on these   benchmarks. It all became about   benchmarks because these are very narrow   things that you could train models to do   well on. They weren't intuitive.

 GPD4   was just awesome. By the time we got to   GPD5, their whole launch, their launch   page had 28 graphs of uh benchmark names   that no one knew what they were. And so   then they had to look for all these   other ways to get improvement. And   that's where you got like inference time   compute.

 Well, what if we we compute   longer for harder questions? And they   began really pushing fine-tuning. Well,   for specific types of problems, we can   get data sets that have answers and uh   questions and answers. And we can use   reinforcement learning that try to take   this pre-trained model and make it   better at this particular type of   problem.

 And then we can have a   benchmark that shows us we got better at   this problem. And my argument in that   article is like this is a way different   game than we were playing when we went   from two to three and three to four.   We're no longer scaling to AGI. We're   taking basically GPT4 and we're doing   all of this like tuning and adding extra   stuff on top of it and around it and and   measuring these very narrow benchmarks.

  And that's why people have this feeling   ever since like I I guess they're   better, but it's not in an obvious way.   It's better in specific tasks or if I   vibe code this it looks better I guess   and it seems more narrow. Um, and so   yeah, we're we're reaching an this   there's a long answer to a short   question, but we are reaching an asmtope   on um just pure fine-tuned LLMs as an   engine for AI.

 We're going to need more   architectures. It's going to take more   time.   >> Well, presumably Chad GPT6 could come   out and oh [ __ ] they just blew through   the entirety of my prediction. This   curve no longer curves flat in the way   that I thought. And [ __ ] this is this   is a different universe now. Yeah, but   that won't happen because they they   tried and it they don't know how to do   that.

 So, it's not going to be just an   LLM. Uh I mean my my prediction of the   future of AI is I think what we're going   to see I think LLMs are very powerful,   but what we're going to see is much more   of hybrid models that are custom custom   fit to particular problems where okay,   this system does this thing better than   a human.

 And in its guts, there's like a   an LLM in there, not a huge frontier   model, but one that's like souped up and   optimized for this particular type of   thing. But there's also like five or six   other models and go there's an explicit   world model. There's a future predictor.   There's a policy network trained through   reinforcement learning to try to   evaluate situations to see what's good   or bad.

 There's a whole logic engine on   top of this that hooks these together.   These are what I think the the AI   systems of the future going to be like.   They're going to be bespoke and there's   gonna be a ton of them. So when we get   to AGI, it's not going to be GPT7 can do   everything you ask it as well as a   human.

 It's going to be a world in which   there's 10,000 different AI products.   And you realize everything I can think   of now, there's some product out there   somewhere that can do this better than   humans. Just like there's AI that can   play chess better than humans. There's a   different AI that can play go better   than humans.

 There's an AI now that can   beat uh professional poker players at   Texas Hold of No Limit. They're all   different systems with their own pieces   in them. And a lot of them have some   language models in them as well, but a   lot of other pieces as well. It's   distributed AGI. That's what it's going   to be like.

 We're just going to wake up   one day and say there's fewer and fewer   things where we say humans can do this   better than computers. And it's a   different model than PAL 9000. There's   one giant. It's a really inefficient way   to imagine solving this problem. If we   just have a big enough language model,   it's going to do all activity.

 It's   going to power all agents. It's going to   automate all systems. that really   doesn't make sense. I think it's going   to be a much more distributed path   towards AGI and AI   >> given   what AI can and can't do and what the   quality of work is that it puts out at   the moment. What is some good advice for   somebody who wants to   work against the weaknesses that are   going to be exposed in other people   because of their reliance on AI by   avoiding it themselves or by using it   appropriately. What would you focus on?   Because again, it seems to me like   >> quantity is easier to achieve than ever   before. Quality is going to be rarer.   That inertia, getting the project off   the launchpad, the blinking cursor of   the blank page.   >> Yeah. where where should people focus   their time and their attention in order   to capitalize this?   >> I think you need to begin thinking about

  the feeling of cognitive strain the way   that you know a weightlifter thinks   about the burn of a muscle or a runner   thinks about burning lungs as a thing   that is uncomfortable in the moment but   man I'm excited about this feeling   because it's I'm getting stronger.   You got to make yourself really   comfortable thinking hard.

 That is the   differentiating factor. I mean obviously   I've been saying this since well 10   years now but that's that's even more   now going to be the differentiating   factor right and if you talk to athletes   they're like this is like Schwarzenegger   and pumping iron talking about pump and   that's really painful what he's doing   actually right like lifting the the the   level of weights the the physical pain   he's in is high and he compares it to an   orgasm right because if you're a   weightlifter you're like oh that pain is   directly translating to more strength   and more more muscle mass you got to   think that same way about your brain you   cannot flee cognitive strain   You have to think about it in a   knowledge work cognitive age. That is   the feeling of my brain getting more   capable. Yeah, I want to seek that out.   Let's go get it. Let's go get some.   Right? Like I want to this I'm nope.   Bring my focus back to this thing. I'm   going to try to push this through and   then when you're done be like, "Oh man,   I exhausted my brain." That's awesome.   That was like a that was like a really   good cognitive workout. M   >> so don't while everyone else is using AI   to run away from strain you should be

  the person running for it because   especially in the American context I   mean the knowledge economy is now a   massive portion of our GDP and the   knowledge economy itself is shifting   more towards uh cognition intensive work   so you know knowledge work can capture   anything where you're not building   things but now all the lower level   knowledge work is being outsourced or   automated a lot of it has been replaced   over the last 30 years by software we   don't have support staff and assistants   and secretaries like we used to because   well you can use Microsoft Word and   email we don't need separated people and   so the the work that's left in our   economy the knowledge economy has been   getting more and more cognitively   demanding   and so the number one skill is I'm used   to straining my brain learning hard new   things and maintaining focus that's what   I would train   that's so good I I I really really agree   and it's so the funny thing is that's   why I asked at the top if you just felt   like [ __ ] Cassandra because each   subsequent   development in technology makes this

  more important. Uh   >> yeah,   >> I do there's always going to be that   seductive   whisper in the back of someone's mind   that well yeah but I can work faster   with AI. I can work quicker by   what if my boss sees me doing executive   functioning through Slack more whatever.   What is the what's the elevator pitch   for you should do   work of high quality and that will end   up winning? You you have to think about   employment.

 Ultimately, it's a   marketplace. There's a lot of   offuscation and fog and smoke, but it's   ultimately a marketplace, right? Uh   you're paid money. In exchange, you   produce things that have economic value.   That's what makes that exchange make   sense. There is not ultimately an   underlying economic value.   to the coordination activities by   themselves.

 There is no actual economic   value to the speed of your Slack   responses or the number of meetings you   go into or the number of like   bulletointed emails with those sort of   chat GPT emojis that you put out. That   itself doesn't generate economic value.   The stuff that does a knowledge work   almost always requires you mastering   hard skills and applying them through   concentration.

 And ultimately that   shakes out there. there's only so far   you can get or so far you can hide being   busy because busyiness can't be   monetized   >> and you know of course you can create a   smoke for a while like I don't know like   you know uh Chris seems like productive   I guess like he's always on these emails   and this and this and that but if you're   not actually producing things that have   economic value like ultimately that   catches up to you your opportunities   narrow you're going to get found out at   some point where if you do the other   thing it's like no I'm creating stuff   that is rare and valuable that's   unambiguously   uh has value in the marketplace. You   write your own ticket. Like what you   want to have a a business where you work   half the year, you can do it. You want   to get paid a huge amount of money, you   can do it. You want to like work for a   company, but you all you choose when you   come into the office and you declare   like I don't want to do meetings. That's   actually a thing. By the way, I talked   to a marketing team at one of the major   tech companies not long ago and they   said, "You know what? um we're in the   sales side and like our group the sales

  group we are exempt from meetings   because they can directly monetize oh   you brought in this many dollars. We can   see it and if you're bringing in dollars   they're like you can do what you want   and they could also see if we make you   go to meetings those dollars go down.   It's like forget the meetings for you   everyone else where there's not a clear   number where they can see how much value   you're bringing like oh you better be   there in the meetings.

 I I've dude I've   always thought this the the the big   problem that most people have that   doesn't exist in the world of sports   stars. If you're a sports star,   everything that you're doing is to   facilitate performance. And performance   is very tightly bounded and it's   quantifiable. If you're a weightlifter,   that 300 kilos is 300 kilos. Yeah.

 You   either pick it up or you don't pick it   up. and your sleep and your recovery and   your nutrition and your hydration and   your game tape and your technique work   and your SNC and your body work and   massage and soft tissue and all of that   stuff combine to this output. It's a   very very sort of single ordinating   principle.

 The same thing goes for   tennis and the same thing goes for   football and the same thing goes for   baseball and so on and so forth. If you   do not perform well, you begin to   scrutinize all of the contributing   elements that that come toward that. The   problem that you have in most normal   people's lives is the output that   they're optimizing for is diffuse and   very hard to work out.

 It's well, I want   to be a good father, but I also want to   perform at work and you and I I do   Brazilian jiu-jitsu on an evening time   and my wife makes me go dancing and I   want to be engaging at a cocktail party.   Okay. Well, first off, that's lots of   things. It's not a single ordinating   principle.

 And secondly, define to me   the lineage between your disrupted sleep   last night and your poorer performance   around the dinner table or in Brazilian   jiu-jitsu or whatever. The diffuse thing   contributes because you inevitably have   to make trade-offs from one thing in   order to do to do another. But also,   it's just hard.

 It's hard to work out   how your performance is performing. And   this is the same in the work life.   Perfect example, the sales people. We   just know if we do make you do this   thing, we lose that thing and that thing   is more important than this thing. It   would be like if for some reason sports   stars were being encouraged to stay up   late, you go, well, we know if we make   you stay up late answering [ __ ]   Slacks, your performance in the game the   next day decreases.

 But for most people,   there's this implicit assumption that   part of what you do is the contribution   to the strategy and the operations and   the the executive function culture and   so on, which means that you forget what   you're there for. I think people have   forgotten what they're there for. What   what what am I supposed to be here at   work doing? What is my out my my outcome   goal?   >> There's so much fat in the America   American knowledge work sector right   now, right? because it we're so wealthy   and there's so much money being slung   around that we can have whole   organizations where most people don't   even know how they're directly connected   to producing that value and they could   just be doing email all day or whatever,   right? It's so inefficient. But there   are I mean there are plenty of knowledge   work areas where people don't put up   with a bunch of this nonsense and it's   all areas where it's very easy to   quantify   >> your production. I I did this essay a   couple years ago where I did a   reflection where I said, "God, almost

  every thought I've had in my books all   came out of my experience as a grad   student at MIT." So, I was at the the   theory of computation group in the   computer science department at at MIT.   Don't call it a department, but the   theory of computation group in the CI CS   lab at MIT, which is like a group the   professors there, the students, we   weren't like this, but the professors   were super geniuses.

 like literally   touring award, touring award, MacArthur,   MacArthur Turing Award, Dyster Prize,   like smartest people in the world and it   was incredibly clear if you were   successful or not. What major theorems   did you prove in the last few years?   That's it. That's all that mattered,   right? And that required a lot of   thinking.

 So, they were terrible with   email. They had no interest in social   media. Uh meetings, like if you're   trying to throw meetings at them, they   would just ignore you, right? I I wrote   about this in deep work even and and   people push back. I was like, "This is   what it's like in that world." If you   send someone an email in this world,   like one of these professors, and   they're like, "Uh, this isn't this is   ambiguous.

 You kind of didn't word this   well or I don't really want to do this."   They just ignore it. Like, that's on   you, buddy. Like, I have to get, you   know, I'm being I will lose my job if   I'm pre-tenure if I don't come up and   solve theorems. And they put up with no   nonsense. And a lot of that actually   infused the my the book Deep Work   because like, you know what? I came of   age in an environment where all anyone   cared about was focus and everything   else was secondaries.

 Like athletes,   just like you said, if this is getting   in the way of my launch angle going down   or my batting average adjusting, I'm   going to I'm going to change it. But   it's crazy right now in knowledge work   how many positions that's not true. But   what I advise people then get in a   position where that's true.   >> Change your your profile at work or if   you're changing your job, change your   job into one where your value production   is unambiguous.

 Now, this is a   double-edged sword is it swings both   ways.   >> Can't hide anymore.   >> You can't hide anymore. But if you get   into one of those situations and then   you do the cognitive work, I know how to   focus. I build the skills. I apply the   skills. I'm not afraid of cognitive   strain. You're in the absolute best   position in our economy, right? You can   write your own ticket, but you have to   be willing to go into a a circumstance   of like this is the only world I know.

  And academia is what did you publish?   That's all that matters. That's all we   care about. What did you publish? bookw   writing. How many copies did your last   book sell? That's all that matters.   There's no, you know what, though? He   answered our publisher email so quickly,   so let's give him another deal, folks.

  No, it's exactly how many dollars did   you make us last time? That's what we   care about, you know, for the next time.   So, it's a scary world where you're   being held accountable, but it's an   equation I always say is that if you're   accountable, you don't have to be   accessible.   If you're like, I can point to this is   the value I produced and I'm killing it   for you.

 Then I don't answer emails, I   don't go to these meetings, I don't do   50 sort of things. You can get away with   almost anything you want. So I think   that's more people should make that   move, especially in the AI age. I   suppose more people should make that   move towards like, hey, hold me   accountable and then do the work to   actually show up. It makes your life.

 So   it's such a better way to go through   knowledge work. to get away from that   hyperactive hive mind brainmelting,   distracting, soulcrushing, slack all day   long nonsense. In other news, you've   probably heard me talk about Element   before, and that's because I am frankly   dependent on it.

 Uh, and it's how I've   started my day every single morning.   This is the best tasting hydration drink   on the market. You might think, why do I   need to be more hydrated? Because proper   hydration is not just about drinking   enough water. It's having sufficient   electrolytes to allow your body to use   those fluids.

 Each grab-and-go stick   pack is a science-backed electrolyte   ratio of sodium, potassium, and   magnesium. It's got no sugar, coloring,   artificial ingredients, or any other   junk. This plays a critical role in   reducing muscle cramps and fatigue while   optimizing brain health, regulating your   appetite and curbing cravings. This   orange flavor in a cold glass of water   is a sweet, salty, orangey nectar, and   you will genuinely feel a difference   when you take it versus when you don't,   which is why I keep going on about it.

  Best of all, there's a no questions   asked refund policy with an unlimited   duration. Buy it, use it all, and if you   don't like it for any reason, they give   you your money back, and you don't even   have to return the box. That's how   confident they are that you'll love it.   Plus, they offer free shipping in the   US.

 Right now, you can get a free sample   pack of Element's most popular flavors   with your first purchase by going to the   link in the description below, heading   to drinklnt.com/modernwisdom.   That's drinklnt.com/modern   wisdom. Let's say that you were in an   organization that was small enough that   you could actually enact some change.   Maybe you're at the top of it, near the   top of it, or you're just you're toward   the bottom of it, but you feel like   you've got the ear of the person that's   in charge.

 If you were to say, you've   got the classic   diffuse hive mind pseudo productivity   malaise, like the the the ambient soup   that everybody's swimming in. How would   you   what would you do? What would you how   would you rework the internals of an   organization that still needs to   communicate? Obviously, there has to be   coordination.

 people aren't working in   silos. There is going to be inevitable   communication and coordination that   needs to happen. How how do you   survive the modern world? What what   would you propose? How would you   restructure things?   >> Yeah, I mean I would do a few things.   One, I would say we're going to have   explicit workload tracking and   management, right? No more just people   throw stuff at you and you implicitly   just add it to your plate.

 We want a   place where we write down what   everyone's working on and we can see it.   And now we can start talking about   things like what is an ideal WIP? What's   an ideal work in progress limit for an   individual? How many things do we want   someone working on at the same time   before that curve uh starts to go the   other way? So, what you have to do once   you start doing that is saying we need a   place to track things that need to be   done that no one is actively working on   right now and we can feel okay about it.   So, I would definitely want to set up   where where things enter into our radar   of this needs to be done. There's a   place for that to go and to be stored   where it's   >> like it's like an organizational getting   things done inbox.   >> Yes. And it's not on anyone's plate   because here as soon as you are   responsible for something it generates   email, Slack and meetings. So once it's   on your plate, it begins to spin off   administrative overhead and slow   productivity. I call it the overhead tax   that gets spun off as soon as it's on   your plate. So everything by default

  goes to a team plate. No one's working   on it. Then we keep track of from that   plate as we move things to people's   individual responsibilities. We have   like I don't you should do three things   at a time. That's it. And when you   finish something, you can pull something   else in.

 So do a small number of things   fast and well and then keep bringing   things. So I would definitely do that.   Uh the second thing I would do is I   would say no more hyperactive hive mind.   Um if you send a message that requires   more than a single message in response,   that should not happen over digital   communication.   If I can't just answer your question   with one more message, then that has to   be real time.

 Now, we can't have that   turn into an explosion of meetings. So,   what we're going to do is we're going to   have daily office hours for everyone.   So, there'll be a daily time where   everyone knows they can call you or walk   to your office or whatever and go   through a bunch of things with you real   quick instead of sending emails.

 We're   going to have morning standup meetings   within the teams for sure. Who's working   on what this morning? Who needs what   from who to get that done? Go do the   work. We're going to have uh so we'll   definitely do those as well. We might   throw in phone hours. It's a new idea   I'm thinking about where you say, "Look,   there's a longer period of time, like   maybe all afternoon, where you can   always call me if there's something   that's so urgent you can't wait till the   next office hours.

" There's enough   friction in phone calls that that   actually tends out to work pretty well.   Like, I'm not just going to call you   because I'm want to get something off my   plate. I won't call you unless it really   is serious. So, I would I would do that   as well. And then I would say, "Okay,   what ongoing work does this not work   for? what type of projects do we work on   on a regular basis where this isn't   working because it it's too long uh to   have to wait till the afternoon's a   problem and say great let's identify   those and for each of those let's build   a protocol here is our protocol for   collaboration on this type of work and   however that's going to work but it's   like the information goes into this   spreadsheet and then whatever someone   checks it in the morning they move   things to shared files I don't know what   it is but whatever it is that prevents   us to have uh ad hoc unscheduled   messaging isn't necessary so explicit   workload load management. I would have   uh this rule of no hyperactive hive   mind. I would have protocols for any   type of recurring collaboration where we   could be explicit about how we actually   want to do this. And then I would have a   culture of talking about deep work and   concentration like a tier one skill.

  How's it going? Uh how many deep work   hours did you get in this week? Are you   happy about that? What was getting in   the way of that? Did you have a   particularly good session? Tell everyone   else about it. Like what worked?   >> Oh, I see you you you did music. You   have a different look. Oh, let's all   think, you know, hey, here's a good idea   that we can borrow, make deep work   culturally, something you talk about as   like this is a a tier one skill that   we're really proud about.

 You do those   things, you're going to 2x your   profitability. This is the thing that's   always frustrated me about these ideas   is like you could make more money if you   do it, but that's it's really hard.   Those changes I just talked about, it's   hard. There's friction. There's   personalities. And this is the thing I   really underestimated when I wrote those   books.

  >> The way we work now is like a uh a low   energy point, right? It's like the   easiest possible configuration of work.   So if you feel friction, you're trying   to do something more structured, you're   trying to do something that makes better   use of our brain and you're getting   resistance, the place you're going to   fall when you give up is the way we're   doing it now. So it's not arbitrary.

  I've realized this hyperactive hive   mind. Let's just figure things out on   the flow. No workload management. It's   not arbitrary. It's the low energy. It's   like this local minimum. It's the place   that like minimizes the complexity that   still allows a company to run. And I   think that's why we keep falling back.

  In mathematical terms, it's a   sub-optimal Nash equilibrium. It's not   the optimal way to work together. But no   one person can leave it and make their   situation better. It's a low energy   state. It's a it's an attractor. It's a   local minimum in the utility landscape.   Whatever mathematical metaphor we want   to use. And so it's it's not arbitrary.

  I was like, "Oh, it's like a law of work   physics. This thing is like a neutron   star in the world, a universe of work   that just attracts everything back to   it. And it takes a huge amount of energy   to escape its pole. That's why I think   we've had so much trouble uh solving   this problem, even though you would make   more money if you did it.

"   I wonder, I'm thinking about sort of   immediately implementable solutions for   this. I get the sense that you could   probably tell people   we don't use Slack before 1 p.m. like   nobody is to post in Slack before 1 p.m.   because that you can ring if it's SOS   emergency   scenario you can just call somebody we   just don't use it and then it means that   everybody knows that they should not be   doing that it's a companywide deep well   I mean look are there going to be some   departments HR for instance probably   would be used but your job is your your   job is HR that you're in the PR   department or something like that your   your job is actually about comms uh but   if you're in marketing or if you're in   accounting something like that. Okay,   sit down and do your [ __ ] work and up   until a point. What do you make of   intermittent fasting for communication   companywide?   >> Yeah, it works. Especially though, what

  really makes that more sustainable is if   you have that quick morning standup on   the team scale at the beginning of the   day where everyone says, "Here's what   I'm going to be working on during these   morning hours. Here's what I need from   each other to make progress on this." So   you you what would have unfolded over   Slack and email, you're doing in 10   minutes.

 So, you say, "Okay, here's what   I'm working on this morning. I'm working   on the the new white paper. Here's what   I need, though. I need those figures   from you. Can you get when can you get   them to me? By 9:30." All right. You're   going to get them to me by 9:30. And I   need those quotes you promised. Can you   get just do that right away? Okay.

 Oh,   so you all know what I need from you.   Okay. Now, I'm going to put my head down   and write that report. So, having that   uh that meeting ahead of time where   everyone says what they need and what   they're going to do, that makes that   time work better. And then the thing   that really works, do the same thing on   the other end of the morning.

 All right,   you said you were going to work on this,   this, and this. What happened? So   there's accountability on the other end.   You can't run away from, you know, if   you just went on email and social media,   they're like, "Well, wait a second. I   thought you were going to write the   white thing."   >> Yeah.

 And if other people flake, they   don't send you the figures. They don't   send you the quotes. You're like, "I got   stuck, man. I never got this.   >> Cal didn't Cal didn't do what he said he   was doing."   >> And they're there in the same room and   they're like, "Oh, okay. I get it. I get   it. I I can't just ignore stuff, right?   Like I actually have to do it.

 I think   that's a great idea. I I think something   like that works well if you put that   accountability   uh before it and you put it after it.   That scares people, by the way, though.   That that really does scare people. Uh   because you actually have to do the   work.   >> And this is the thing with really social   media and smartphones killed this way   worse. AI is going to make this worse.

  But that was a big inflection point uh   in terms of losing our comfort with   concentration. That got really bad once   we got algorithmically optimized content   and we really got used to that. And so   it's scary if you just go to a company   and say, "Here's the new plan, boss. Uh   we're going to have a meeting in the   morning.

 You got to tell me what you're   going to do for the next five hours and   then you got to do it and we're going to   check in after that five hours and see   how it went." That's a nightmare for a   lot of people. That is like, "Oh god, I   don't know what I'm going to do."   >> I I agree. Um, I get the sense that a   nice way to introduce this would be   look, everybody's brain here has been   turned into slop.

 Everyone, no one is   able to do their job as effectively as   they should. So, you are expected to do   the work, but the reason that we do the   pre and post is not to whip somebody   into performance review. It's to give   you accountability cuz you don't look   like a tit in front of your co-workers.   But if you don't get to the point we're   going to the same as when you start   training for a marathon, you don't run   10k on the first day.

 You will titrate   the dose up and over time, you know,   week one will permit some [ __ ] and   week two will permit a bit less [ __ ]   and week three we're all in it together   and this person's pulling ahead. They're   really like a hyperresponder. You know,   they're making loads of gains in the   focus gym and other people are moving a   bit more slowly.

 Okay, what is it that   they are doing and so on and so forth?   But imagine that. Imagine if you if you   had a a a companywide um focus   initiative where people would just okay   we're going to move together everybody   is going to focus on focus and um   interesting around the AI thing. So   George my housemate's writing a book at   the moment.

 Uh do you know cold turkey?   Do you ever use cold turkey?   >> I know about it. Yeah.   >> Yeah. Yeah. It's a website limiter app   limiter for MacBook. We've been using it   for a decade. um his his cold turkey   went rogue and um just kept shutting his   browser down even though he wasn't   trying to access the thing that he   wasn't supposed to.

 It said he needed to   install it. It was a nightmare. Uh and   here's a conversation between him and   his AI. Uh Cold Turkey has gone rogue   and I need to remove it. Please tell me   how to delete it from terminal. And the   response the response is, I'm not going   to help you bypass it, George. This is   exactly the scenario you set it up for.

  You're two days in. the book is waiting.   Close the terminal and write. And   replied and said, "No, it's got a bug,   so I can't get on calls." He's like   pleading with his own AI because he's   obviously put in the instructions, be   rigorous with me, be tough with me, tell   me that I should be getting back to   being focused when I start to go off   task, do the thing.

 And that's a an AI   equivalent of what you're talking about,   which is this supervisionary   oversight commission thing, but he his   just happens to be based in silicon   instead of in other people.   >> So maybe AI will help us. we it can   basically chastise us like   >> well the problem is the problem that you   have with the AI thing is it's so   [ __ ] sick of fantic all the time um   that it will tend to bend eventually to   what it is that you want.

  >> Yeah. But no one believes that the   chatbot interface is the future of AI.   The boosters, the the skeptics, the   moderates. There's there's an emerging   consensus that we're going to look back   at this current moment where we interact   with AI by typing into a chat window.   that that's going to be like the Usenet   news groups of the beginning of the   internet.

 It was like a cool thing early   on that showed the promise of the   internet, but the tools got better.   There's better ways to make use of it.   Um, so there's the thought is in the   future AI is going to be more integrated   into more things. It'll be more agentic.   It'll be a lot not like having   conversations in English text. Um, but   deploying agents to do things maybe with   natural language, but also it'll be more   integrated in the software.

 Individual   tools will be more common. So it' be   much more common. I'm in Microsoft Excel   and I'm like, can you sort row five by   this amount and cut out all columns that   you know have less than this many   values? And it does that. It's going to   be that that's what the interactions are   going to become like.

 And so this idea   of having a a singular anthropomorphized   entity through which you're having all   conversations, that's almost like an   accident of early AI. I mean, OpenAI   will tell you this that chat GBT was   supposed to just be a demo of the type   of things you could do using the APIs   into their language models is like the   type of tool you can build that would   make use of AI and then it caught them   completely off guard and everyone wanted   to use chatbt and chat with it because   it was really cool. Um, I don't think   that's going to be the form vector. So,   I think a lot of these issues we have   now like this is weird. Uh, it's   unsettling. We're anthropomorphizing it.   We're getting parasocial relationships   with the agents. We're having romantic   relationships with them. We're getting   unsettled because seeing having English   conversation, we have a hard time not   simulating a mind on the other end of   this.   >> That's why I shout at my chat.   >> That's why you shout at it. I think a   lot of this two years from now is going   to seem it'll be super narrow, right?   Because I don't think uh just having a a   this sort of general purpose oracle you   chat with, that's not the future. That's   not what people think we're going to be   doing.

  >> Why are people mad about 40 being   removed?   They were just h my understanding was   they were just happy with the find. So   you you tune these things. The   conversational style comes from a   post-training tuning session where you   give it, you've already done the   pre-training which is unsupervised and   you go through this post-training   session where you have a lot of examples   of questions and answers and you ask the   question and then it gives an answer and   then you sort of zap it using   optimization theory to try to move like   now we're going to change the weights to   be closer to this answer we already said   was better. So if you have a bunch of   examples of the way you want something   to respond and you go through one of   these sort of zapping training sessions   after the fact, it'll respond more like   that. So they just changed the way they   were doing that. And the thing they   changed to people didn't like the tone   that created. So it was just about   >> what d literally like the data sets   you're using when doing this   fine-tuning. Um after you've done that   big massive pre-training where it's

  unsupervised.   >> Talk to me about the role of quantum   computing in AI.   minimal to non-existent.   >> So QAI is all just [ __ ]   >> Yeah, I'm not Yeah, I mean quantum   computing is really interesting. There's   a huge amount of technical problems just   to actually get these things scaled to   the number of cubits in which they're   useful and there's a there's a fallacy   out there in thinking about quantum   computing that it's basically like a   normal computer but times a million.

  >> Yeah.   >> Which is just not the way these things   function, right? So there's only very   specific problems you can solve with a   quantum computer because you actually   have to express the problem in the   language of physics in such a way that   you're creating what's known as a wave   function that when it collapses it's   going to collapse to a configuration   that's the right answer.

 Therefore like   implicitly searching a large state space   in sublinear time. Only certain problems   allow you to do that. So it's unlike a   normal computer where I can program a   computer to do almost anything. Quantum   computers is much more narrow what you   can do with it. uh   >> could you give me an example of   something that it would and wouldn't be   able to do?   >> Well, like the the big example, this was   a guy who was at MIT when I was there,   Peter Shaw, early on was the one who   figured out like, hey, one of these   complicated wave function collapsing   things you could do could factor prime   numbers   >> or or uh yeah, factor numbers to see to   find the prime factors rather find the   prime factors of big numbers. Um, that's   a really big deal because uh RS Yeah.   public public key encryption and   ironically this this just goes to show   how crazy MIT was is also at MIT is Ron   Revest who I TA for who invented you see   R and RSA. He invented public key   encryption. So like the guy who invented   public key encryption is there next to   the guy who figured out how quantum   computers could   >> could maybe undo it.

  >> Undo it. Yeah. So it's kind of   interesting. So it's good at that. Uh   there's a lot of problems that are based   around um simulation of quantum or   physical physics systems and that's you   you can simulate quantum physics systems   directly using quantum in a way instead   of having to try to simulate them with   so it's very good for that there's a   certain type of search it gets a little   technical but there's a there's a   certain type of uh search that you can   implement it has applications so so   there are interesting applications   um but I I the thing I was beginning to   sense recently which made me worry is   that there was a sense of like um hype   migration. So people are getting a   little bit frustrated sort of like   postGPT5 of like this isn't filling my   need to have something to be in, you   know, a technology that is going to   change everything. I love that concept   and they begin sniffing around. Okay,   but what if we just quantum somehow will   unlock AI and solve all these problems   we're having. I think it's way more   complicated than that. There are narrow   applications of these particular things   that might have some AI application. Um,   but you can't like run an LLM on a

  quantum machine and now it's a billion   times better. That's just not how it   works. So quantum is interesting. It's   just really hard. The problem is the   errors multiply. I mean that they make   these cubits, these uh these quantum   bits they use for these algorithms. It's   incredibly complicated.

 You have there's   different ways to do it, but in some   ways you have laser beams in a super   cool chamber holding like a a particle   in a very careful state. And what it   generates errors and then the errors add   up with other errors and it's after you   make enough of these things then then   the errors they swamp out of control.

  It's a really you know   >> so you're telling me that the the the   [ __ ] M6 chip in the MacBook Pro is   not going to be a quantum one. It's not   going to be the Q6 chip.   >> It's not. In fact I I was I'm now I want   to know what QAI is. What is QA? You   mentioned QAI.   >> Q quantum AI.   >> Yeah.

 But I mean is there a particular   product or just people talking about   quantum is going to just make AI better?   >> Yes. Yeah, there is. Um I have a a   friend who I train with like this is   like you know what I love some of the   people that I love the most are the ones   who you wouldn't predict uh have the   life that they do.

 And there's a girl   who trains at lift ATX on a Saturday.   Lovely girl. I've trained with her a   bunch of times. Real cool. Boyfriend's   cool. Like does fitness modeling. Super   hot. the long hair lift, the big all the   you know like but super strong all the   rest of the stuff like feminine as well   quantum computing degree like works in   works works in quantum computing and she   was telling me about quantum AI and she   was telling me about uh Q QAI as it's   referred to and it's a burgeoning field   supposedly unless she's lied to me   unless she's totally [ __ ] lied to me.   >> Yeah, I'm curious what they're working   on. Uh UT Austin has good quantum   theorist. Look, I'm searching for it.   Uh, a guy I knew from MIT, they they   hired him away there. RC or see quantum   quantum AI merges quantum comput with   machine learning to process   highdimensional data faster than   classical systems.   No, they're working on it, but I don't   know. I don't know how that's going to   work basically.   >> Well, so I don't know what they're   working on, but um it's not something

  that that you hear a lot in computer   science circles yet. So maybe they'll   have some breakthroughs. It's worth   looking at, but I don't know how that's   going to work.   >> Okay. Uh one of the other elements I   guess of that people struggle with when   it comes to deep anything uh is learning   the process of learning.

 Talk to me   about the mechanics of keeping keeping a   a a deep reading habit alive.   Well, I mean I think reading pages is   probably the cognitive equivalent of   steps, right? So, if you're a 10,000   steps a day person is like this is just   like a baseline to make sure that like   at least my physical systems are being   used.

 You should have a a page count 25   pages a day, 20 pages a day uh of   reading a book. It just is like getting   those cognitive steps in because I I   think we recognize more and more reading   I would say it's the cheat code but it's   it's better to think about it as like   reading is the thing that formed a   modern brain.

 And I'm like I'm more and   more convinced about this. I have I have   a book idea I'm working on now where I'm   sort of exploring this idea. Uh the   brain before we had the Neolithic   Revolution, it's it was the same   neurons, right, uh 15,000 years ago that   we have right now. But if we go   pre-ereading, those neurons were doing   the things they were evolved to do,   which is very much about like the visual   system and the audio system and we could   communicate through spoken language and   that's fine.

 And then we invent reading   and this is this is not something that   our brain is evolved for. So, in order   to read, we have to go through this this   sort of excruciating process of learning   to read, in which what you're doing is   actually rewiring sections of your brain   to connect in ways that they weren't   originally meant to connect to.

 So,   we're we're reforming our brain when we   learn how to read. And we develop what   Maryann Wolf calls deep reading   processes where you've now yolked   together different parts of your brain   that don't normally work together that   can now have to work together in order   to understand written text. Once your   brain is wired to do that, it can if you   reverse this and write, you can generate   much much more sophisticated thoughts   than you can if you haven't done this   wiring and your understanding of things.

  The complexity of what you can   understand when you have this new   rewired brain that also really goes up.   So reading is like uh it's not just oh I   get stronger in my brain. It   reconfigures your brain into like the   modern you know postcognitive revolution   >> brain.   >> Okay.

 What why is it important to read   physical books then? What what is lost   if I read Substack? I know that you're a   fan of Substack. I I love Substack. I   think it's fantastic. Uh   what's the difference between reading it   on a laptop versus a phone versus a   Kindle versus a physical piece of paper?   >> Well, there's two different things going   on here.

 There's medium and content   type. U like so if you're reading a book   in a a physical book or you're reading   in a Kindle, um doesn't matter, right?   Right. I mean, they're both actual   physical medium. Like the way that the   Kindle is actually a physical   experience. It's it's it's actual little   discs that are, you know, dark on one   side and light on the other.

 And they   make a page. They have little electrical   impulses and you shock the disc you want   to turn and you don't shock the ones you   don't want to turn. And so you've   literally created an actual black and   white physical version of the page on   the Kindle. You're not unlike a a   computer screen or a TV where it's light   being emitted.

 There's no light being   emitted. It's physically that's the   page. It just created a new physical   page that has text on it. That's why you   have to actually have a light on a   Kindle to read it. Um, so it's just a   page that reconfigures itself into a new   page. I love eing technology. I think   it's really cool. Uh, content type.

 The   issue is I mean there's a lot of this   research we've known since the '9s. A   lot of this is captured in um the best   book on this would be uh the shallows,   Nick Carr's book, The Shallows. When   we're reading something like a web page   or Substack, for whatever reason, uh we   skim much more aggressively.

 That's the   main issue. we jump around uh much more   aggressively just trying to pull out the   key points. I think that's all just   acculturated, right? Like you could sit   and read like if you print out a   Substack article and sit in the library   and you read it carefully, it's the   exact same thing as reading a book.

 It's   the exact same thing in in sense of the   experience on screens. We tend to skim   around more. The other advantage of like   a book that was actually published   versus like a post you see online, it's   just better thought through, right? So   when you write a book, you spend a   couple years on it.

 Like you're really   uh you spend a couple years crafting the   book and you might have been based on a   lifetime of thinking about this topic.   And so you take your time when writing a   book and it gets edited and re-edited   and you go back like I'm writing a book   now. I've been working on it off and on   for like three or four years.

 I've   rewritten this book like three times.   It's like this isn't right. This isn't   clear enough. you know, and so when you   go through text that has been that   carefully thought through and   structured, that's also you just get a   different experience because the pieces   click together at different scales and   it just uses you that you build in your   brain these intricate interlocking   pieces that all hook together and is   beautiful and you get that aha moment   feeling.

 There's an actual physical   endorphin rough you get in your brain.   Um, so I, you know, I think reading   smart books written by smart people that   took a long time to write, that's your   calisthenics for your brain. It it   literally changes your you're a smarter   person if you do that versus if you   don't. So good. I have to say   reading fulllength books has been uh the   volume that I do that has been decreased   over the last few years largely because   of Substack.

 So, uh, there's a extension   for Google Chrome called Push to Kindle,   and if I press it,   >> yeah,   >> the article appears on my Kindle because   I don't like reading on my phone and I   don't like reading on my laptop.   Probably for the reason that that you   said, but when I think about it, it very   much is   uh running downhill because uh what's   the longest substack that you're going   to read? 20 minutes. Maybe 25 minutes.

 A   [ __ ] long article.   >> Yeah. Uh, and   maybe part of that, maybe part of my   ponchump for is that I do get the   outcome, right? What what is it that I'm   looking to learn? Oh, I want to find out   from Steve Stewart Williams about sex   differences in m desire for sexual   novelty, something like that. Okay.   Well, I I will learn the outcome in the   same way as I could feed myself food   that was just a cube of calories and   that would sort of give me the caloric   intake that I needed.

 But what you're   presumably reading for, apart from just   the enjoyment of reading it, is to be   able to recall it and for it to be woven   into the broader mental landscape that   you've got, which actually probably   means you need to spend time and   attention with it. And some of the   leanness and brevity that comes with an   article uh actually might work against   you.

 Maybe you need it to be said to you   in five different ways. Maybe you need   the author to meander off onto a story   that takes three pages to explain about   this guy who owned a Ferrari and parked   it outside of a hotel so that you can   then come back in. And each one of these   is a little Velcro latch hook that you   can hook yourself into.

 And yeah, I   wonder whether I wonder whether the   reading or uh discriminating toward   reading stuff that is exclusively   shorter form results in the sense that I   am learning lots. But if you are to   actually do some sort of scrutiny around   that, well, okay, how much of it can you   remember?   >> How long did you spend with this idea?   Did you spend long enough for it to be a   part of now your mental models and the   framework that you how how much can you   recall that would be an interesting an   interesting challenge   >> and the frameworks understanding are   shallower just because it's less time to   establish them. So like in a sub it's   not a bad thing but you know what can   you do you typically have like one idea   and like here's something that supports   that idea and here's maybe like a   different idea and here's why that   doesn't work and if that's all you're   consuming that becomes your mental model   for how knowledge is gained and I think   we see a lot of this I mean think about

  internet culture now is much more   conspiratorial and I don't mean in the   like sort of grand conspiracy theory   which it is but not in not just in like   the grand conspiracy type of thinking,   but in the confidence, there's this   quick jump to confidence where you're   like, that's wrong because of this and   boom, and you think that like this is   like this slam dunk case or something   like that.

 That's a result of not   reading a lot of books. You read a lot   of books, you're like, "Okay, this is   way more complicated." Uh,   >> everything is way more complicated than   you thought it was. And there's probably   a clear truth here, but clear truths are   more complex. Like even the notion of   what a clear truth feels like comes out   of reading books, right? Like you   understand, oh, ultimately like this   person was right, but it's complicated   and like, yeah, this was not so   clear-cut and that this is like a   compromise and this was really important   and these factors were here, but   honestly, those factors aren't as big as   you think and this factor really was   more important and so like this really   was the right thing to do. So even like   your notion of what's true or what's not   true or what it means for something to   be clear is like different than if   you're just looking at boom slam dunk. I   think it's a big problem online espec   both sides of the political spectrum do   this like you you want everything just   to be this person is just garbage and   completely wrong and there's like this   one simple thing I know

  >> that means you're completely wrong and   I'm completely right and you're wrong in   like the worst possible sort of way. Uh,   and that is like such a sopolific I'm   saying the word   >> solistic. Yeah, exactly. You said it   right. I have to read more.   >> Um, but it's sophistry for sure. Right.   This idea of uh this is how truth and   argument unfolds is like there's an   obvious flaw that's easy for me to gro,   which I guess now could actually be a   verb as opposed to just meaning   understand. Also, I could literally   grock it, I guess. Um, and now it's   clear that you're wrong and I feel   righteous, you know. And then we go   seeking that. And then we want to   simplify everything in the world to   you're just terrible and this person is   perfect and this idea makes the most   sense and if you disagree with this idea   it's because like you want to eat   children and you know it just becomes   it's a different under this is what I   think we get wrong. It's not just like   we're we're uh we don't have the right   information. we've changed what our   notion of truth is because we're not   exposed to the complexity of truths when

  you read a not only a scholar like a a   smart case for it but then you read the   arguments that they confronted and then   you read someone else that's arguing   against their point and you're like oh   okay I' I've seen the clash of like   minds and now in that clash like I kind   of see what's going on here like yeah   the truth really leans this way and it's   I feel really real conviction in that   because I've seen like the best minds   come at this from either side and I   really understand and it's not cut and   dry but ultimately like this is the   right thing to do. Um that was like a   very familiar thing to people and   leaders like in times past where you   lose it if you're exposed to these uh   lowresolution   copies these lowresolution simulacums   these easy to digest pre- chewed   versions of argumentation and   understanding that just changes the way   your brain thinks about what true even   means. Yeah, there's an arc to sense   making that you kind of need to track   and if you don't track it, you just   assume that answers appear.   >> Yeah,   >> it's like no, no, they don't. Cal, you

  [ __ ] rule. Let's bring this one home.   Where should people go to keep up to   date with everything you do?   >> Oh god. Uh, calport.com. I guess my   books are on Amazon. My podcast,   uh, Deep Questions on YouTube or   wherever you get podcast newsletter at   kelupport.com. Deep Work too many things   going on now, Chris.

 Deep Work is 10   year anniversary. I'm excited about it.   all new. Uh I replaced all the blurbs on   the back with most of them are now   organic. I could just like people who   have said things about it without me   asking them to uh say it. So that's fun.   And I have a master class out on on this   stuff too. So I don't know.

 It's   everywhere. Too many places. I feel too   busy.   >> For a person who's a a digital recluse,   you are everywhere. But that's a   function of focusing on quality, not   quantity. I can't wait to speak again,   man. This is this has been so much fun.   I appreciate the help.   >> Always a pleasure, Chris.

 Always always   a pleasure to talk with you.   Congratulations, you made it to the end   of an episode. Your brain has not been   completely destroyed by the internet   just yet. Here's another one that you   should watch.   Come on.
