
I was looking at the top 10 jobs that   are most likely to be disrupted by AI   and I really do worry about this.   >> So the nature of the economy is changing   for a long time. Blue collar work like   plumbers, electricians, brick layers has   been devalued. But it could be in the   next couple of years.

 These are the   roles that are elevated the most and   that plumbers regularly earn more than   lawyers. And for the last 25 years, I've   been building companies from scratch and   I've been through the global financial   crisis and co but I have never   experienced what we're experiencing   right now.

 I've never seen more fear for   the disruption that is coming. And my   real bare case for AI is that every time   you go on AI, your request is going off   to a big computer in a Walmartized   building somewhere. And those big   ginormous computers, they last 3 to 4   years before they need to be replaced.   And this year ahead, we're going to   spend 650 billion and that could cause a   massive financial collapse.

 That's the   thing that I'm worried most about.   However, I've never seen more excitement   for the opportunities that are in front   of us. So let's talk about in a world of   AI what are the skills that survive.   >> So I really believe that everyone should   build a little bit of a personal brand   not like to become an influencer but   position yourself with a group of people   who know who you are and know what you   do and could enroll you in their   opportunity.

 Second one if there's one   skill set that everyone should be   learning at the moment it's how do   entrepreneurs think? How do   entrepreneurs behave? What are the   skills that make an entrepreneur   successful? And entrepreneurs just   simply follow six steps and we do it   over and over and over again. and we'll   go through the six steps.

  >> So, are there any particular   opportunities that you think that   anybody listening right now could pursue   to make money?   >> So, I think one of the best   opportunities is   >> that is such good advice that we don't   hear enough.   >> This is super interesting to me. My team   given me this report to show me how many   of you that watch this show subscribe.

  69% of you that watch this show   frequently haven't yet hit the subscribe   button. And some of you have told us   according to this that you are   unsubscribed from the channel randomly.   So, favor to ask all of you. Please   could you check right now if you've hit   the subscribe button if you are a   regular viewer of the show and you like   what we do here.

 We're approaching quite   a significant landmark on this show in   terms of a subscriber number. So, if   there was one simple free thing that you   could do to help us, my team, everyone   here to keep this show free, to keep it   improving year over year and week over   week, it is just to hit that subscribe   button and to double check if you've hit   it.

 Only thing I'll ever ask of you, do   we have a deal? If you do it, I'll tell   you what I'll do. I'll make sure every   single week, every single month, we   fight harder and harder and harder and   harder to bring you the guests and   conversations that you want to hear.   I've stayed true to that promise since   the very beginning of the Dio and I will   not let you down. Please help us.

 Really   appreciate it. Let's get on with the   show.   Daniel, I think we're living in the most   interesting, opportunistic,   terrifying time to be an entrepreneur, a   professional, to really be anybody   because this is a moment of such   fundamental change. And I really wanted   to have this conversation with you today   because I want to understand how you're   thinking about AI from an opportunity   standpoint as an entrepreneur, but also   just for everybody that's working in a   normal job and who is at risk of having   their their career, their livelihood,   their identity, their qualifications   made redundant because there is now an   alien amongst us that can do so much. So   this conversation really is about giving   people answers. It's about being honest   with them about what's coming. And it's   about preparing them, setting them up so   that they have an advantage   in the face of the future we face. So   give me the 30,000 ft view.

  >> Well, my background for the last 25   years has been building companies from   scratch. And I've been through the com   and I've been through global financial   crisis and I've been through uh Brexit   and co. I have never experienced what   we're experiencing right now. I've never   seen more excitement for the   opportunities that are in front of us   and I've never seen more fear for the   disruption that is coming.

 We are living   through transformational times that is   very similar to 250 years ago where the   end of the agricultural age ended and   the beginning of the industrial age   began.   >> I would argue that it's more significant   because there's two forces that kind of   keep me up at night. The first force is   AI, which is you can think of it as just   the replacement of the human brain from   a sort of productivity standpoint.

 And   then the other is robotics. And the   problem is they're coming in at the same   time. And I was watching I don't know if   you saw this the other day.   >> So I'll put this on the screen for   anyone that's watching the video right   now, but this is a demonstration that   took place in China of how advanced   their robots are.

 And I had to check   multiple times to make sure that this   wasn't fake. They are doing back flips   and landing perfectly on their feet. And   so when you combine intelligence with   the disruption of our physical form, our   muscles, our body, our ability to pick   things up and move them through through   time and space,   it begs the question like where do we   >> where do we fit in to all of that?   Strangely, there's something called the   Jevans paradox.

 And the Jevans paradox   is a paradox where when we think   something is going to completely disrupt   the way that we uh live and work. It   often has the opposite effect. We   thought that YouTube was going to   completely wipe out television. And it's   true that Hollywood lost tens of   thousands of jobs, but YouTubing created   500 to 600,000 jobs at the same time.

  And it used to take 150 people to make a   a TV show or a movie. And now it's 5 to   10 people making YouTube videos as a   little team. and they can have a wildly   successful YouTube channel. With the   Jebans paradox, if we currently said   that in order to have a successful   software company right now today or in   the last few years, you needed to have   10,000 customers and you needed to have   a team of 50 people and you needed to   raise$1 to5 million to get a software   company off the off the ground. If all   of a sudden the cost and the commitment   drops dramatically to have a software   company and you only need 500 customers   to work it to make it work and you only   need two people on a team to make it   work and you only need a tiny bit of   funding to make it work. What happens is   like YouTube channels you can end up   with literally millions of tiny little   software businesses that are super   successful for 5 to 10 people and they   do something niche and they do something   special. They don't look like   traditional software companies either.   So a traditional software company would   just do the software whereas these   little software companies might do   software plus they might do dinner

  parties where the clients get together.   They might have an annual ski retreat.   They might have a podcast and a YouTube   channel that goes with it. And all of   that could be done by 5 to 10 people   using AI tools. So the Jevans paradox   would basically say that there is   millions of unmet needs and that those   unmet needs are not explored because the   cost to explore them is too high.

 But   because the cost to explore those has   come down, then now we can actually have   millions of businesses that never   existed that we didn't even know we   needed to exist.   >> I was sat here the other day with Dra   who is the CEO of Uber. He turned around   Expedia, made it super profitable,   turned around Uber that was losing 2   billion, made it generate about 9   billion in revenue, 10 billion in   revenue.

 And uh he sat there and said to   me that their 9,000 couriers and drivers   won't have jobs in the future. And and I   so I sit and go, okay, so what what are   they going to do? Are they all going to   start businesses somewhere? Do they? And   also I think one of the interesting   things about AI is the speed of   transition.

 With the industrial   revolution, there's a little bit of a   delay because infrastructure took time   to build.   >> Takes a long time to build.   >> But this is the first innovation that   I've lived through that is built on   >> it's instantaneous.   >> The internet.   >> The minute an AI learns how to be a   lawyer in one place, it can be a lawyer   in every place.

 The minute it learns how   to diagnose a disease in in one   location, in one hospital, it can   diagnose a disease in every hospital in   the world. So, it's this instantaneous   roll out uh because it sits on top of a   network that already exists.   >> This is what actually Boston Dynamics   said to me. I was watching a video of   their new robot that's working in   factories.

 It's a humanoid robot that   can work in factories, pick things up,   move things around. They said, "The   great thing about robotics is if one of   our robots on a shop floor in Boston   learn something, all of our robots learn   it.   >> It's it's wild."   >> Like, hell. So yesterday Tesla built and   they took this wonderful photo because   they built the world's first Tesla Cyber   Cab.

 Now if anyone doesn't know what a   Tesla Cyber Cab is, it's the first ever   fully autonomous car that doesn't have a   steering wheel and it doesn't have   pedals.   >> Yeah. You just hop in and there's   there's no steering wheel, no pedals.   You can't take control even if you   wanted to.   >> The Cyber Cab is the company's answer to   vehicles like the Whimo.

 The two-seater   coupe unveiled in 2024   comes without a steering wheel or   pedals. It's guided by AI and they're   now making them. The first one was made   yesterday. Again, 100 over a 100 million   people's job is to drive and you can get   one of these now for Elon saying   $30,000. Um, you can rent them, lease   them.

 You can buy a bunch of investment   assets and set them out,   >> set up your own fleet and connect them   to different networks like Uber and all   of those sorts of things. And the cost   to move around is going to go through   the floor because you know my Uber to   come here today was probably $50 uh and   that will probably be $6 or $7 uh once   that is rolled out.

 So the thing that   with the Jevans paradox is it doesn't   mean that everyone gets the same job and   that they get like uh there's just more   of exactly the same jobs. It means that   the transformation creates exponential   growth as a result of the transformation   in an unexpected way. Mhm.   >> So growing up, my mom worked in   newspapers and there was probably half a   million people working in newspapers as   journalists and all of those sorts of   things and that has dropped by 80% in   the last 25 years.

 But at the same time,   the number of people who are bloggers,   the number of people who have substacks,   the number of people uh who are doing   the kind of work of journalists and   actually making money as a result of   content creation has gone 100 100x. So,   uh, I think it's something like three to   four times more people now make their   money in a way that kind of looks like a   journalist than there ever were   journalists prior to the technology that   disrupt journalists.

 So, it's not that   it's not that those exact same jobs uh   are are replicated. It's that something   similar emerges as a result.   >> I understand this and I when I read   about the Jews paradox, I like ran it   through my head multiple times to to   understand like how it fits in different   industries.

 But there is a part of me   that still thinks this is slightly   different because in the example you   gave where there was a a content   creation industry that was then   disrupted by a content creation   industry. I go yeah this this the skill   of intelligence was still of human   intelligence was still   rare and scarce and only humans had it.

  M   >> so the disruption of the content   creation industry to a different content   creation industry was still owned by   humans. That transition was still a   human one. But in such a world where AI   agents can make, if you go on a lot of   social media platforms, I shame which   ones, it's just pure AI slop now.

 Yes,   it's just people's agents churning out   content that they haven't touched or   done anything about. And then I was I I   started saying to you before we started   recording that what we're going to   experience and what I think a lot of   people don't fully embrace about this   idea of becoming a content creator for a   living or building a personal brand is   when you look at some of the graphs and   I'll throw the graphs from the Financial   Times article on the screen.

 There's now   a plateau of people spending time online   for the first time in history. Well, in   the first time in internet history,   >> Gen Z especially were the first   generation to plateau. Yeah.   >> In their time spent. But the amount of   content, the amount of AI agents, the   amount of people that are now choosing   to make to do content as a living is   exploding. Yes.

  >> So you have a supply and demand issue   where there's a set amount really like a   set amount of hours consu sort of   consumption hours and then you have this   huge exponential explosion in available   content because a kid in Mumbai   >> Yeah. attention is a limited resource   but content is   >> and content is unlimited now.

  >> Yeah. and and more so so AI slop is just   rolling in and also AI slop doesn't do   it justice. Some of my favorite things   to watch is AI generated. I'm enjoying   AI. So think about it a little when it   comes to personal brand. Think about it   a little bit like an airport that the   airport has got this fog that is rolling   in.

 If your airplane is already above   the fog,   >> then you're you can continue to fly. But   if your airplane is not taking off   already, then the fog is going to keep   you on the ground. So like for example,   you've invested so much into your   personal brand and people will come   along to see you live and they would   love to go to dinner party series that   you know involves you and there's a   whole community around DOAC, right? So   all of those things means that your   airplane's already up in the air, you   can continue to fly.

 But if you were   starting 2 years from now or a year from   now or maybe even 6 months from now and   you weren't smart about it, there's just   too much AI generated content. You won't   get traction. you won't get you won't   get that liftoff moment. Uh the same way   that opportunity is coming to an end   because of that AI generated content   >> what I'm seeing in the algorithm.

 So we   do some data analysis every year on the   variance of performance of pieces of   content we produce on different   channels. Now I've been making social   media content for 15 years. So I have a   bit of a sort of a mental history of   like every year us doing this this   particular data analysis to see the   variance between the worst thing we post   and the best thing we post.

 And this   year we did the same we ran the same   analysis with my data science team led   by Austin and my team to see if the   variance between the worst thing we post   and and the best thing we post is   getting bigger because what that kind of   is a proxy of is is the algorithm caring   less and less and less about how many   followers I have and is it caring more   and more and more about whoever posts   the most interesting thing today which   is if I was building a social media   company and my primary objective was to   retain people. I wouldn't care if you   have two followers and Stephen has 500   followers. I would just care about who   post the best thing.   >> So we did that analysis and it's it's an   almost perfect graph that looks like   this.   >> And this is the variance increasing.   >> Y   >> which actually means that okay Steven's   taken off from the sky but every day I   wake up increasingly it doesn't matter   what I did yesterday.   >> What we've seen is the end of social   media and the birth of algorithmic media   >> interest algorithms we call them.   >> Yeah. So, social media was all about   connecting with your friends and finding   out what your friends are doing. Um, and

  algorithmic media is just finding out   what the algorithm thinks that you   should be watching today. But with that   said, there's this multi-dimension to   it, which is you've got books, you've   got live events, you've got the podcast,   and it's the multi-dimensional angle   that actually really sets you apart.

 The   creators that just simply want to put a   piece of content on YouTube and get paid   through AdSense revenue and that really   simple that one-dimensional model,   that's coming to an end. But the   creators that have a community and they   meet up in the real world all of that is   is part of an overall ecosystem that is   very defensible because one you know   people want all of that packaged up   together.

  >> Why is it fundamentally defensible from   if we think about first principles or   human masloavian needs. Let me give you   a big answer to that which is if we go   back in time to the agricultural age,   farmers had to know when was a good time   to plant the crops and then they had to   go out and toil the soil and put the   seed in the soil and the soil did most   of the value creation in the economy.

 At   the end of that process, the farmer had   to know this is the day to harvest and   then we need to harvest that and we need   to turn it into something and take it to   market. And AI is very similar, which is   that it's very good at doing the middle   to the middle. It's not good at knowing   what to do in the very first instance or   knowing when to stop and how to take it   to market.

 So the the entrepreneurs job   is to do step one and two, let AI do   steps three to eight, and then do steps   9 and 10 and to basically have a   coherent cohesive view as to what you're   trying to get the AI to create.   >> Theoretically though, I could I could   ask an AI agent to think about the goal   that will benefit me the most and make   as many AI agents as it needs to to   fulfill that goal.

 And then it would   make start one business and that would   start another business. lots of   different businesses,   >> start another business, build another   website, contact a supplier.   >> I think what you're into here is two or   three steps ahead of yourself where, you   know, all of this is theoretically   possible, but we haven't seen those kind   of examples happening yet, right? We   haven't seen whether that will   ultimately unfold.

 I'm not saying it   won't. I think we are moving into a   completely new economy. Like like when   you lived in the agricultural age, it   was completely like unbelievable to you   what the industrial age would have   looked like. like it's beyond all   comprehension if you had an agricultural   age mindset to imagine factory   production or coal production   >> and the thing the principle there that   allows you to see what the future might   look like when it's exponential and not   linear is imagining any rate of   improvement and so this is how I think   always in my business is when I'm   thinking about which bet to make I   imagine if there's just 5% rate of   improvement per quarter eventually this   happens   >> and so with some things we've done on   this show we started two years ago and   for the first 18 months it didn't work   and then 6 months ago it exploded   because eventually the rate of   improvement got to the point where it   was viable and now it's the single most   important disruptive thing we've ever   done   >> and I think about what I the example I   just gave there of agents I'm like if   you just imagine any rate of improvement

  just imagine 1% a year   >> and obviously it's way more than that   but imagine 1% a month eventually we get   to a point where a team of agents   >> if nothing if nothing disrupts it one   thing that is very likely to happen in   the next three years is the whole thing   comes crashing   It doesn't financially make any sense to   build the data centers that we're   building.

  >> But you're not saying that AI is going   to disappear.   >> The technology itself is remarkable, but   the financial model just makes no sense   whatsoever at the moment.   >> At the moment, which is kind of typical   of bubbles, right?   >> So over the last 180 years, there have   been infrastructure buildouts that have   bankrupted the economy consistently   again and again and again.

 In fact,   there's a pattern. Whenever we spend   more than 3% of the overall GDP of the   economy on an infrastructure buildout,   it bankrupts the economy briefly for 10   years. Right? So this happened when we   did railway tracks. In fact, it happened   twice in the UK and twice in um the USA.   Then we bankrupt ourselves putting the   electrification grid in place.

 We   bankrupted ourselves putting uh highways   in place. Now there's something that   makes this worse than ever before and   that is that when we built train tracks   they lasted for 100 years. When we built   roads they lasted 50 plus years. The   telecommunications g uh fiber optics 30   years.

 All of these investments were   multi-deade investments that we could   get benefit from and and and leverage   for decades. Data centers last 3 to four   years before they need to be replaced.   So we are building something that has a   3 to four year life cycle that costs   hundreds of billions and it has to be   replaced every few years and there is no   financial model attached to this that   justifies it at all.

 So one thing that   I'm predicting is that in 2029 100 years   after the great depression we will see a   massive financial meltdown based off the   back of these data centers that have   been um developed at the moment. And for   someone that doesn't know what a data   center is,   >> so it's like a big Walmart or an airport   filled with computers and those   computers are running AI, right? So   every time you go on AI, you're   actually, you know, your request is   going off to a big computer in a   Walmartized building somewhere.

 But   those GPUs, those uh computer stacks,   those big ginormous computers, they are   like iPhones. They last about 3 years   before they get superseded. This year   ahead, we're going to spend 650 billion.   650 billion sounds like so abstract.   It's the equivalent of giving every   single person in America an iPhone Pro   with AirPods.

 But here's the crazy   thing. 95% of people who have been given   the the free uh iPhone are not willing   to pay for it. And the tiny number of   people who are willing to pay for it,   they're only willing to pay $20 a month,   most of them. So this $20 a month,   everyone's getting a free iPhone   effectively and then a small 5% of   people are willing to pay $20 a month.

  The numbers are just astronomically out   of balance.   >> The numbers are astronomically out of   balance. So what happens next? You're   predicting in 2029 there's a financial   crash.   >> There's not a 0% chance that the   financial model around what what we've   launched with AI is catastrophic. It's a   huge financial problem that very few   people are talking about.

  >> So let's talk about in a world of AI.   What are the skills that survive? And   like what what are the professions that   you believe survive? You've got   children, Daniel. When when they come to   you and they say, "Dad, um I'm hearing   about all this AI stuff and I've seen   these robots in China doing back flips.

  What should I be learning now to make   sure that the next 20, 30, 40 years of   my career is prosperous?"   >> It's the entrepreneurial skill set that   is the most important skill set. It is   essentially the skills of identifying an   opportunity prototyping fast and cheap   experiments to see if you've got   something that people want, taking it to   market, making your initial sales,   scaling up to your addressable market,   and then exiting and then coming up with   a new idea.

 Because even if you're in a   big corporate, they're going to want to   prototype things. They're going to want   to spin out new products. They're going   to want to come up with new initiatives.   And we need to step through that process   of is this a good idea or not? Can we   validate it? Can we scale it? Right? And   you want to go through that process as   fast and as cheap as possible the way an   entrepreneur would.

  >> And on that first point of identifying a   good idea.   Now is there any way to know if the idea   that I have is a good idea or a bad   idea?   >> Yeah, this is a step that entrepreneurs   call validation. And the rookie   entrepreneurs that fail, they don't do   this step very well, right? So they   don't do market validation.

 They don't   do product validation. They simply get   excited about an idea and then they go   all in on the idea. And what really   experienced entrepreneurs do is that we   come up with ways to do fast cheap   experiments. So for example, last year I   had two ideas and I I actually kind of   liked one a lot and I liked one a little   bit.

 And what I did is I set up a   waiting list campaign and I basically   invited people to join the waiting list   for idea number one and about 750 people   joined that waiting list and they filled   in a set set of questions so that I knew   that 750 people were interested in this   idea. This was my favorite idea. And   then the second idea I invited people to   join that waiting list and 4 and a half   thousand people joined that waiting   list.

 So even though this wasn't my   favorite idea, it was way more exciting   for people and way it was sitting on top   of a much bigger need. So off the back   of collecting 4 and a half thousand   people on the waiting list and   collecting all the data and the   information, we went to some angel   investors about a week later after doing   that and we raised quarter of a million   pounds.

 So about300 or $400,000   and all of that took about a week or   two. With that example, how do you know   that the business itself and the   delivery of that idea actually meets   their expectation? Because I can think   of multiple examples where someone   clicked on an idea that I had, but   actually the delivery of that idea fell   short of expectation because sometimes   things can sound good when you you see   the flyer or the poster or the advert,   but the reality of the experience is   actually not that great.

  >> So, let me walk you through the six   steps quickly. Step one is called   founder opportunity fit and founder   opportunity fit is finding something   that you want to do. Step two is   validation. Right? So this is where we   actually try and see is there a market   could we could we build something? Could   we sell something? Right? So that's two   validation.

 Can we build it? Can we sell   it? Step three is called product market   fit. And this is the next step where   you're actually trying to figure out can   we actually make this live up to   people's expectations so that they   really like it. Is there a group of   people who buy this and they're happy   with the purchase? And we want to do   that carefully and cheaply.

 And then   finally once people say well or the next   step once people say yes we can do that   we go to market and go to market is   making sales. And then after going to   market we scale up right step five. And   then the final step is we exit. So we go   through those six steps and we call that   a value creation loop.

 And that value   creation loop goes through those six   steps and each step has its own little   job. And what we're trying to do is just   validate, go to the next step, achieve   the milestones, go to the next step. And   and that's how we do it as   entrepreneurs.   >> So in a world of AI, are there any   particular opportunities that you think   are um new and exciting that anybody   listening right now could pursue to make   money, whether it's passive income on   the side or to leave their current role   and pursue entrepreneurship for?   >> Well, the starting point is that   everything is an opportunity because   what do entrepreneurs do? we find things   that could be done better, faster,   cheaper or with more emotional benefits.   >> But has AI created any particular   interesting opportunities in your view   that you think that's a a huge arbitrage   opportunity?   >> I think one of the best opportunities is   a small SAS company. So software as a   service was an elite level business   opportunity that very very few people   could enter. That was something that   only maybe tens of thousands or hundreds   of thousands of founders at most

  globally could have a software company.   So it was very very elite. And the   reason it was elite is because it was   very very hard to mobilize the talent   required to build a software company.   You probably needed, you know, maybe 10,   20 or 30 uh developers to build a   software product that would actually be   a good software product.

 You needed to   raise millions of dollars to get through   the costs of developing software uh   companies. And you probably needed   10,000 customers to have a break even   software company. Now, because of AI,   all of those costs have massively come   down. And there are software companies   that are wildly profitable that have 500   customers or a thousand customers.

 They   service a tiny little niche. Uh they   attach a community and some media and   some training to those little software   niches. So one of the most exciting   things is that if you essentially said   that I would like to take what I know,   turn it into a playbook, take that   playbook, ask AI to advise me on what   software we could create, and then use   AI tools to build out that software.

  you're able to get very deep into that   journey for almost no money.   >> I was thinking about this the other day   because in my company, we're rebuilding   our entire ATS ourselves.   >> So, an ATS is basically the system you   use when you recruit people. Everyone's   name goes into the ATS. It's kind of   like a like a search engine.

 Yeah, like   a database of where candidates who have   applied for your company currently are.   >> And over the last couple of years, I've   paid tens of thousands of dollars every   year for an ATS for my companies. And   this year I thought, you know what,   actually I reckon we could build an ATS   in a couple of weeks ourselves and it   could be bespoke to us.

 So we started   that project. I saw the the first   version of it yesterday. We started a   week ago   >> and the first version the the version of   it I saw I was like, "Oh, this is   significantly better than what we were   using before because it's bespoke."   >> Yeah. And this made me think about the   the opportunity of creating software   generally, which is that in a world   where it becomes, as you say, like   cheaper, easier, faster, we're all going   to be using more software, but we're   probably not going to be paying   other people for their software,   especially when it's these kind of   tools, productivity tools and systems.   >> It's purely a tool, it's very easy to   replicate. But if it's a tool that comes   with a community, if it comes with   education and training, if it comes with   agents that   >> education and training.   >> Yeah. So like for example, if you were   to do an ATS, right, an applicant   tracking system, a a hiring tool, and   you had the DOAC uh system and method   that I can go and attend the training as   to how you on board people, how you   create culture, how you do things at

  DOAC, I'm now interested in the software   because it comes with that exciting   training. if there was also a boot camp   that I could go to that was attached to   that product. If there was also an   annual retreat or a dinner series, if   there was also uh some funding   opportunities that came with that. So   once upon a time you were just simply   going to focus on creating a software   tool because that was so labor intensive   and also it had a natural moat or   protection around it that you didn't   have to get creative. But now we live in   a world where the AI lets you to build   the product pretty quickly. It helps you   to do all these other things that we   talked about and suddenly it's actually   quite a a fun product that you that you   can spin up. What you've already created   would have probably cost 500,000 in 6   months.   >> Oh my god. 6 months. I wish.   >> Not that long ago.   >> Yeah. It would probably cost It would   have probably taken about 18 months   total end to end.   >> And you've done it in a week.   >> Yeah. And so everyone else can do it in   a week. And in fact, if anyone if that's

  anyone's business right now, there's   going to be a thousand new ATS systems a   day. One's going to trend on Twitter.   You know, people are going to download   that one and then they're going to jump   ship because a new one emerges and it's   better, it's more agentic, whatever. And   so, again, I think are we seeing   software generally become a commodity?   >> What we're going to see is we're going   to see all business opportunities be   like YouTube content.

 I mean, if I went   back 25, 30 years ago and said there's   going to be 10 person unfunded little TV   studios that produce content every   single week for almost no money.   You you would think that's crazy. I   mean, Seinfeld used to cost 5 million an   episode. Um, The Simpsons and Friends,   these were all multi-million dollars per   episode.

 And we've now replicated that   that can be done like by a tiny little   team for free every week. It's   interesting because the minute we say   that the answer is to do these things   that are now easy and free and cheap to   do, it's almost like we we then don't   acknowledge the fact that if everyone's   doing it, it's no longer a valuable   thing to do.

  >> It's less valuable.   >> Yeah. As it becomes easier, the other   access is the decline in the value. So,   we're saying we're saying to people go   be a content creator. But the very fact   that they can without needing a CNN size   skyscraper or production equipment also   means everybody can which means that   that that actually is losing value at   the same rate that it's becoming easy   theoretically and and so what I   continually think about from first   principles is what is it that I can bet   on that is irreplaceably human which   only I can do and a kid in Mumbai cannot   do. And so when we say software I go kid   in Mumbai and then we say content I go   kid in Mumbai. Well, uh, physical   experiences in the world, real world, I   agree with you. So, standing on a stage   and telling your story is something I   mean, you already see that thousands of   people show up to see this and to be   part of to be in a room with other   people who are sharing an experience.   See, the thing that the AI version of   you can't do is turn up to an event.

  >> I agree. So, I I say what I say because   I genuinely want to be challenged here.   I I'm I sit here with these AI experts   and CEOs because I genuinely I hope that   they say something that   >> tilts the current belief that I have and   like makes me go, "Oh, actually, you   know, that's a good point.

 I'm in search   of good points on the subject matter."   So, when I said what I just said about   content software becoming increasingly   commoditized and because it's becoming   commoditized, we're like tempting people   to go do more of it without   acknowledging the fact that the very   fact that people are doing more of it   means it's less valuable and it's more   of a commodity.

 And what I'm saying   though is that these things have to go   together. So simply like anyone who's   doing real world experiences, I think   what's going to happen is you'll go to a   conference and that conference will come   with custom software that lasts 2 or 3   weeks that is really really interesting   and it relates to that conference and   that software was created as a SAS   product for the attendees of that   conference and it kind of pops into   existence very briefly.

 These things   used to be separate and now they all   cluster together, right? So, it's a   buffet of things that you all put   together. If we take most successful   businesses now, they do social media.   That used to be a standalone business.   It was crazy to think that a hair salon   could also be a media business.

 I've met   with tens of thousands of entrepreneurs   and the number of people who want to go   big is tiny. It's a fraction of the   entrepreneurial community. What most   people want is a business that provides   an amazing lifestyle. They want to live   and work from anywhere. They want to be   able to travel.

 They want to do three or   four days a week. They want to drop   their kids off at school. They want to   uh do non-monotonous, interesting work   that is a little chaotic, a little   creative, a little bit fun, a little bit   challenging. They want to work with a   small group of people that they get to   know and enjoy and travel through life   together.

 And those are the types of   things that the majority of people   actually want. Very few people actually   want big. So, one thing that I'm   noticing is that it's probably harder   than ever to build a big business, but   it's easier than ever to build a small   successful business. So, if we were to   say that a business that does 1 to 5   million of revenue with a team of 10   people, that is like totally   like super uh possible.

 But once you go   beyond that, it's becoming harder and   harder because you get disrupted more   frequently. So you have to be an elite   athlete of entrepreneurs to withstand   the constant disruption and and um the   the constant change that's coming. So   because your natural mindset is to think   really really big, you're probably   missing that for many people who are   working in a annoying corporate   environment and their job is monotonous   and they feel tethered to a desk or they   feel tethered to a team that doesn't   really care about them. you know, a lot   of those people are going to actually   end up in small dynamic little   businesses that will never be big, but   they'll be great. They'll be fun, you   know, and people will, you know, have   flexibility and they'll have uh, you   know, great, you know, great   opportunities as a result.   >> I think you're right. I do have a bias   towards trying to find, you know, big   opportunities. But actually, I think the   big blue ocean opportunity, which is,   for anyone that doesn't know, I think of

  red oceans from the the book called Blue   Ocean Strategy as very competitive,   >> hyper competitive horrible markets where   it's like a race to the bottom. You're   all doing the same thing. Like you're   all saying the same thing, doing the   same thing, and you all think that your   unique positioning is is unique, but   it's actually not.

 The market doesn't   value it any differently. Like a wine   company saying that their wine is a year   older or that using a fancier word on   the label. It's a red ocean, a blood   bath. A blue ocean is an uncont   uncontested waters where you have room   to grow much less competition and there   is actually something fundamental to   your proposition your business idea the   thing the value you're giving to the   world that is unique   >> I'm looking for blue oceans   >> and yes I will try and build a big boat   in the blue ocean   >> because that's my nature but also life   is easier when you sail in blue oceans   for everybody even if you want a   lifestyle business I think one of the   great examples at the moment is if you   started a marketing agency when I   started In 2014, especially a social   media agency, you were in the blue   ocean.   >> You were briefly   >> briefly. And they say, you know, blue   oceans often last for 10 years. In 2024,   my best friends, I'd say 70% of them run   marketing or brand agencies.   >> Yeah.   >> I'm having the same same therapy session   with them once a month at the moment.   And if you look at the big five, big   four, big five agencies in the world,

  the WPPs and Martin Surl's business,   >> they're all   >> they're all competed to way their   margins. They're struggling. Yeah.   >> They're losing their profit. they're   losing their market share.   >> And AI and digital technology means that   this disruption cycle happens in months,   not years anymore.

 So you said a blue   ocean can last for years or decades. Not   in the world of AI. In the world of AI,   as soon as we've identified that you've   got a blue ocean, we can replicate that   real fast and we can come and fly out to   your blue ocean with with an with lots   of competition. Here's something that's   interesting.

 Throughout all of history,   whenever you find societies that have   low social mobility and hyper   competition, there's lots and lots of   festivals. So you go into medieval   times, they've got a festival for every   season. They've got a festival for every   life event. There's just constant   festivals. You go into rural Africa,   rural India, and it's festivals,   festivals, festivals, right? Weddings,   funerals, seasonal festivals.

 It's a   huge part of human culture that we have   lost in big cities. like we don't do a   lot of festival or rare it's rare that   we do a lot of festivals these real   world experiences but I don't   necessarily think it's a blue ocean   because uh as soon as people realize how   much people want to do festivals and   want to do real world experiences a lot   of companies can also add this to the   mix I think what is defensible is   community experience and embracing the   constant chaotic change and coming up   with new stuff all the time   >> one of the bets I'm making and it goes   back to what like again reasoning up   from those principles. If the question   is what can I do that an AI agent or AI   could not do and especially in the   context of what humans will continue to   need.   >> Mhm.   >> When you were born Dan, you're born with   a bunch of needs and those needs like   fundamentally haven't changed. One of   them is like connection.   >> I think you'll always be able to discern   what is real human connection from   artificial connection. I remember being   16 years old and in my psychology class

  at the back when they told me about the   recess monkeys experiment where they got   a recess monkey, this little small   little monkey. They pretended that its   mother was a wire mesh. So they made a   wire mesh mother. The recess monkey   grows up to be a psychopath because it's   it fundamental human need of connection   is not met.

 They then did it with a   cloth and the recess monkey grew up to   be a bit more stable. And then obviously   they showed the examples where the   recess monkey actually had a physical   flesh mother and it was it was fine. So   I say this to illuminate the fact that   we have fundamental needs that if not   met there will be consequences.

 One of   ours is connection. So, as a content   creator, I can sit here and I can tell   you what happened today, right? I can   say at 6:00 this guy broke into this   bank and then he left. I think that's a   commodity. Now,   >> I think the thing that I can do as a   podcaster, as a behind-the-scenes   content creator, as a streamer,   >> this is why I'm so bullish on streamers   >> is they're making irreplaceably human   content.

 There's no AI that can an AI   can tell you what menop what happens in   menopause. An AI can't tell you its   experience of menopause. Yes, we need to   find something that only we can say as   humans. And every single person has this   by the way, but a lot of us overlook   what we can say as a human. I recently   came across a financial planner and his   name is Matt Pitcher and he gave a TED   talk and the TED talk is about what it   was like for him to meet 100 people who   had won the lottery.

 So, he had a   partnership as a financial planner with   the uh British lottery. And every week   someone wins the lottery and then he   goes in and meets them a week later   after they've discovered they've won the   lottery.   >> Wow.   >> But what he did did is he looked back at   his history and he had lots of different   things that he was doing, but he looked   back at his history and he connected   some dots and he said, "Hey, wait a   second.

 There's something that only I   can talk about. There's something that   is that is my thing that I've   experienced that I live through that   I've sat in those living rooms. I've sat   eye to eye with those people and only I   can talk about that." And because of   that TED talk, he's he's had half a   million views in the first few weeks and   you know, his business is obviously   going to explode and all of those kind   of things because he found something   that only he could say.

 I believe that   every person has something that's human   that only they can say that's highly   relatable. You shared with me an   interesting philosophy. Uh when we first   met, I did my first episode on Diary of   a CEO and it got millions of views. And   I said to you, why is it that my episode   got millions of views, but a few weeks   ago there was a billionaire CEO who only   got a few hundred thousand views.

 And a   few weeks before that, there was a   billionaire CEO who only got a few   hundred thousand views. And you said,   Daniel, relatable beats impressive.   >> Yeah.   >> And a lot of people think that they have   to cure cancer or launch a rocket to   Mars or that they have to win a Nobel   Peace Prize or float a company on the   NASDAQ.

 And actually each individual   person, we have to discover what I would   call your personal intellectual property   or your personal intellectual capital   and your personal story, your personal   playbooks, you know, your your triumphs   and your disasters, the things that   you've done that are interesting to a   certain group of people that you can   quantify, that you can describe, that   you can give me what it was like.

 Those   are your personal playbooks. Now once   you have personal playbooks, you have   the ability to turn that into all sorts   of products and services through AI. But   you but it starts with having personal   playbooks.   >> I think this is the key mistake that a   lot of content creators are um making,   which is because it's easy to make stuff   now, it's tempting just to churn stuff   out.

  >> Yeah.   >> Whereas I'm making less content now in a   world of AI. If you look at my LinkedIn,   I used to post, if you go back like   three or four years, I was just churning   stuff out my quote picture, anything   fluffy, like just fluff   >> data.   >> Yeah. Now I go, well, if everyone can do   it, the reason why my LinkedIn, you'll   see almost every post I post now is a   human story about something I've gone   through, you'll see photos of me, you'll   see photos of my family.

  >> You're saying stuff that only you can   say.   >> Yeah. So, we all have to find what is   the thing that only you can say. And no   robot, no AI could ever say that because   it hasn't lived that experience.   >> Yeah, it's got all the data. It's got   all the knowledge, but it's got no lived   experience.

 And also from a business   perspective, an AI can never stand on a   stage. An AI can never host a dinner   party. Uh an AI can never meet someone   face to face and put their hand on their   shoulder and say, "Hey, I've been   through what you've been through and   you're going to be okay." Right? So all   of those things AI can't do.

 So once you   discover something that only you can say   it it becomes a superpower.   >> I think my best performing post this   year was actually me proposing to my   fiance a prime prime example of   something that is irreplaceably human   which is getting down on one knee and   telling another human being that you   love them.

 There's no AI that has ever I   mean listen   >> it's never experienced it.   >> Yeah. Exactly. So and there's something   so human about that.   >> It's relatable. It's not impressive.   It's relatable. Um from first principles   I ask myself which type of content am I   making is creating the the strongest   parasocial relationship   >> with the person on the other end.

 If I   post on my LinkedIn everything happens   for a reason. Am I how much have I moved   the needle on our our relationship my   relationship with you? Probably zero. If   I talk about something more human, some   struggles that I'm having uh from a   human perspective, if I'm more honest,   authentic, and open or vulnerable about   the experience I'm going through, like   streamers who sit there for seven I   think did I say this last time that I I   asked a streamer a couple of questions.

  >> And I asked the streamers like, "What do   you do?" And he was like, "Oh, nothing.   I just sit there and   >> sit for seven hours and watch Judge Judy   with the audience and we chat." I say,   and this is a prime example of   Parasocial.   >> They actually talk to you. They go chat.   Let me know if you think X Y or Z chat.

  Drop W's in the chat. That's a friend.   >> That's the closest thing to a friend.   It's the strongest parasocial   relationship.   >> Well, you said about the football game   where the loudest cheers in the audience   came for those streamers who were just   connecting with people.   >> They've built friendships basically with   their audience.

 So, of all, I think in a   world of AI where justformational   content, which is this thing happened or   this is what the gut microbiome is, is   going to become commoditized. The thing   that isn't commoditized is content that   creates relationships with audiences and   then as you say then converts that   relationship into stronger experiences   like IRL events and so on and so forth.

  I've got a couple more ideas that I I   haven't fully shared with the world yet   but I'm just I'll wait for the right   time about all of this stuff.   >> See it's not one piece that is adding   the value. It's the ecosystem of pieces.   So it's having something to say that   only you can say.

 Let's call that your   personal playbooks. Let's call that your   personal intellectual property. It's   having the people or your community that   you're going through life with, right?   That's called that your ideal customers,   your ideal personas if you want to make   it a clinical definition of in marketing   speak that that gives rise to a personal   brand.

 When those two things touch, you   then end up with a personal brand,   right? As if by magic, you end up with a   personal brand because you've got   intellectual property and you've got an   ideal customer who connects with that   and then you you are the person who   embodies it. So you you give rise to   that. And then the question is, well,   how do you make money from that? Well,   you productize it.

 You create products   and services. And it's the product and   service ecosystem that makes money. It's   not one product or service. It used to   be that you could just have a a product   or service that you offer. And now it's   the product and service ecosystem. The   people that I see making the most money   at the moment, they don't do one thing.

  You don't do one thing. Right? So, if I   look at uh your personal P&L, you've   probably got 27 different ways that   money came and hit your bank account   last month. There's speaking, there's   podcasting, there's AdSense revenue,   there's sponsors, there's shareholdings   in different companies that you've got.

  Um, there might be some one-to-one   coaching that you might have done. There   might be an appearance fee. There might   be some book royalties. There's multiple   books. Uh, there might be some software   that you've launched. So there's all   this stuff that sounds crazy and chaotic   in a pre-AII world, but in a postAI   world, it's not that hard to create all   these different products and services   and to be launching different things and   to be going on a journey with people and   having a product and service ecosystem.   I'm the same, by the way. I've probably   got 20 different things that, you know,   that I'm involved in at any given time.   >> I was reading yesterday that the for the   first time, I mean, I was reading a few   things. One of the interesting things I   read is that Spotify said their best   developers haven't written a line of   code since December thanks to AI, which   again is a whole another conversation.   Maybe we should touch on that. What are   the occupations that you genuinely   believe won't exist 5 years from now as   we know them?   >> People say lawyers are going to be   disrupted.   >> Well, I recently had a law legal case   that I had to resolve and it was going

  to cost us £50,000. So, $60,000   uh as a start the process with a law   firm. We took matters into our own hands   and we used Claude and we actually fixed   the process and resolve the process by   spending 20 a month, $20 a month. And   Claude gave us a coaching session on how   to handle it.

 Gave us multiple decision   tree pathways. Gave us the documents   that we would need. Gave us an Excel   spreadsheet of do say this, don't say   this in the negotiation. And it made me   realize, my goodness, what a lawyer's   going to do. Uh because if all they do   is charge for time for money to   regurgitate contracts, I don't need that   anymore.

 Right?   >> Multiple reports say legacy legal tech   and data firms have lost roughly 20% of   their value so far in 2026.   >> 280 billion was wiped off the value of   publicly traded companies like that in   the last week. Like it's wild. Um   because we're not going to need that. I   don't believe we're going to need these   business models as they currently stand.

  I think they're going to have to change   and adapt. I think a lawyer needs to   take a completely different shape. Part   business coach, part lawyer, part prompt   engineer. They're going to be the key   person of AI in the room who the   lawyer's job will be to work with you on   your AI prompting and help you get the   resolution.

 You're probably going to   need a lot less of a lawyer's time. Blue   collar work has been devalued. And we've   seen people who work with their hands   and people who uh turn up to your house   and fix your house in a devalued role.   And it could be in the next, you know,   uh, couple of years. These are the roles   that are elevated the most and that   plumbers regularly earn more than   lawyers simply because the nature of the   economy has changed.

 One thing I've   learned over the last 25 years is the   pendulum swings. Things that very few   things stay the same. There is always   this swinging pendulum. And the swinging   pendulum is like, oh yeah, white collar   work behind a screen is the high value   thing. Oh, no, it's actually blue collar   work with your hands.

 You talked about   supply and demand. We dis the government   disrupted the natural way children go   out and find opportunities in the world   by making university loans come along.   And they said, "Oh, everyone can just   take out a university loan and go to   university. In fact, you must and you   should go go to university.

 Get yourself   in debt or else you'll never get a job   anywhere if you don't do a university   degree." And lots of young people who   should have been plumbers, electricians,   and concreers and brick layers went off   and became a m got a master's degree in   the mating habits of butterflies and you   know some random degree that doesn't   have a job attached and they ended up in   60 70 $80,000 worth of debt to get this   degree that no one was asking for.

 That   market distortion means that we now   don't have many plumbers and   electricians and the blue ocean is now   being a trades person.   There's a phase a lot of companies hit   where they're no longer doing the most   important thing, which is selling. And   they get really bogged down with admin.   And it's often something that creeps up   slowly and you don't really notice until   it's happened.

 Slowly momentum starts to   leak out. This happened to us and our   sponsor pipe drive was a fix I came   across 10 years ago. And ever since my   teams across my different companies have   continued to use it. Pipe Drive is a   simple but powerful sales CRM that gives   you the visibility on any deals in your   pipeline.

 It also automates a lot of the   tedious, repetitive, and time-consuming   parts of the sales process, which in   turn saves you so many hours every   single month, which means you can get   back to selling. Making that early   decision to switch to Pipe Drive was a   real gamecher, and it's kept the right   things front of mind. My favorite   feature is Pipe Drive's ability to sync   your CRM with multiple email inboxes so   your entire team can work together from   one platform.

 And we aren't the only   ones benefiting. Over 100,000 companies   use Pipe Drive to grow their business.   So, if something I've said resonates,   head over to piperive.com/ceo   where you can get a 30-day free trial.   No credit card or payment required.   >> Steve, what are you doing?   >> Uh, just making myself a delicious   coffee   >> from the freezer.

  >> From the freezer. Have you not heard   about Contier?   >> No.   >> Oh my gosh. This is going to change your   life. A couple of months ago, the   founder of this business called Matt   sent a big shipment of this coffee to   our office in London. What most people   don't know is that the processing of   coffee takes out a lot of the taste.

 So,   what they do is they flash freeze it at   the optimal moment when it's most tasty   and they send you in the post the coffee   in these little frozen ice cubes. Now,   Matt sent a big shipment to my office. I   moved it to the kitchen. I said to the   team, "Knock yourselves out." And then I   saw so many messages in our Slack   channel of people going, "Oh my god,   what the hell is that? It's so   delicious.

" All I have to do is pop it   out in the morning using the little   button on the back of this thing. I pour   my hot water in and I mix it and that is   done. You can get $30 off your first   order of Cometier coffee if you go to   cometier.com/stephven.   Try it and please Instagram DM me,   LinkedIn me and let me know if you love   it as much as I do.

 I was looking at the   um top 10 jobs according to AI that are   most likely to be disrupted and it said   things like drivers with Mackenzie   estimating 30% of them will be automated   by 2030 customer service representative   and call center reps which I used to be.   >> Mhm. Same   >> 50% headcount reductions after AI roll   out according to some estimates some go   up to about 80%.

 I actually saw a tool   on my timeline yesterday that is real   human voice indistinguishable from   humans that's just launched and is   causing a huge stir. So that they're   thinking that will replace even more of   the customer service roles. I I did   speak to the CEO of Cler TLDDR as he   said we currently have 7,000 employees.   We're going to be able to get down to   3,000.

 He said after summer because of   um AI and we'll be using our existing   team members that are in customer   service roles to do more sort of bespoke   white glove VIP   >> VIP stuff will go up. In fact, Jean's   paradox would suggest that a lot of the   dehumanizing repetitive work will go   away. But actually, if there are AI bots   that are really good at setting   appointments for a VIP human person to   have a conversation, then that work will   go through the roof.

 Because one of the   reasons that people, like right now,   most companies wish they could have more   VIP conversations, but the appointment   setting, they don't have a lot of the   low-level appointment setting stuff   happening. And if the appointment   setting stuff, if the cost of that goes   to zero, then the the the affordability   of the VIP level treatment um becomes   you know becomes uh much more feasible.

  >> Retail cashes, admin assistants,   bookkeepers and payroll clerk, sales   development reps, warehouse workers with   um Amazon and others reporting that   robots now assist or replace labor in a   roughly 40% of fulfillment tasks. And   that Boston Dynamics video, which I'll   put up on the screen, shows a humanoid   robot working in a factory.

 What's nice   about some of this is that many of the   jobs here are jobs that a lot of people   don't actually like doing. They are   repetitive and dehumanizing. They're   late night. They're early mornings. So   potentially,   provided there is a Jeins paradox that   something happens that's more fun, more   humanizing, more interesting, more VIP,   more chaotic, and you know, all of that   sort of stuff.

 It could be a very   positive thing.   >> Fast food workers. Um, or   >> I used to be a fast food worker.   >> So did I in McDonald's? I think it was   two days. I did two years at McDonald's.   >> Oh, really? Because this disruption is   happening at record speeds. Where do all   these people go? Because, you know, even   in examples, oh, they could do AI   labeling.

 They need to be upskilled and   trained. And I worry that the rate of   disruption isn't going to meet the rate   of creation of new opportunities.   >> And I really do worry about this. Like I   think people wonder why I have these   conversations on this podcast over and   over again. My philosophy to talking   having conversations on this podcast is   basically I'll say to my team I'll say   Steve you want to have a conversation   about   >> you know this particular subject the gut   microbiome and I'll say   >> we've covered it   >> which basically means I'm no longer   curious y   >> I have the answers I know about the   trillions of gut micro and I know how   the gut brain access let's move on   >> I keep having these conversations about   AI because I feel like I'm getting no   good answers   >> okay so here's what's interesting there   is something which you have which is   this elite mindset which is how do I   organize society   so that everyone gets a job and everyone   does stuff right and this is this is the   trap that many people have fallen into   and it's actually at the root cause of   socialism so the root of socialism is

  that I know better than everybody else   and I will come up with a way of running   society so everyone gets looked after   that's the top down mindset the crazy   mindset that actually works is if If we   give people education and training and   we make opportunity transparent and we   actually let people know what's actually   happening in the market and we give them   price signal data, they will   selforganize and reorganize and they   will have a bottom-up revolution and   they will find amazing interesting   things to do. The money is in the   economy, right?   >> You think that's true?   >> That's called capitalism.   >> I know, but   >> capitalism works   >> in the UK. Let's take the UK as an   example, cuz we're all just screaming at   each other about brown people. We're not   talking about the the real alien, which   is like the fundamental economic   disruption of AI. Yeah. There's a report   that came out yesterday showing that   unemployment in the UK has hit   >> it's 25% up and youth unemployment has   grown by more than 25%.   >> It's like 16.1% of people that are   between 16 and 24 unemployed now.   >> Yeah.

  >> And we're still not talking about the   economy. We're talking about brown   people.   >> When people feel that they can't get   ahead, they look for somebody to blame.   And this is historically consistent.   What is really happening is that the   government has become so big in the   economy.

 The the UK government is now 45   to 50% of all spending in the UK   economy. That's essentially a socialist   or it's getting socialist. Every amount   of government spend is a market   distortion regardless of what it's for.   And I'm saying there plenty of things   governments should be spending money on,   but all government spending is a market   distortion. It's not market driven.

 And   there is a monopoly on spend. So   therefore, it is a market distortion.   The more government spending you have,   the more market distortions you have.   >> What do you mean by market distortions?   >> So a market distortion is where the   markets are not really able to function   because there is some big organization   like the government spending money and   taking away price signals and taking   away the realities of the market.

 So a a   great example is what happened with   student loans. So rather what in a   capitalist society what would have   happened is that young people would have   heard oh my goodness there's a shortage   of brick layers. Have you heard that   brick layers are making £300 a day? Wow,   I would love to make £300 a day.

 I'm   going to go be a brick layer. Guess   what? It's a brick layers apprentice.   I'm going to go and be an apprentice.   I'm going to get paid to learn this   trade. And there would be a market   driven pull towards being a brick layer.   A young person would get a job at a bank   and the bank would say, "Hey, can we   please pay for you to do a finance   degree because we need more people   who've got a finance degree and we will   actually pay for you to go through   that." So that's a functioning market.

  It's basically based on uh needs and   wants and things that are needed within   the economy. What the government did is   they created a what's called a market   distortion. They said to all young   people, we are going to give you as much   uh lending as you like to go out and   take whatever university courses you   want.

 Um there's no price data, there's   no signaling data. It's just you if you   want to borrow £50,000, you can go to   any course. If you're really interested   in the breeding habits of butterflies,   go and do a master's degree in that. and   um you know, happy days, right? You you   could it doesn't matter whether there   are jobs associated with it, you must go   and get a a university degree.

 So, they   set up an entire system that pushed   young people to go get £50,000 worth of   debt and do a degree that no one was   asking for. That's a market distortion.   We now have a bubble of over 280 billion   pounds worth of uh debt that will   probably never be repaid. Uh we have a   entire generation of young people who   are saddled with this debt that takes   away all motivation.

 There's no point in   working because they pay such high taxes   every single time they make a payment to   pay off their student loan. They they   pay 600 but the debt goes up by 650.   Right? It's it's absolutely insane. And   that's a classic example of governments   meddling with the markets creating a   market distortion.

 And now we have   hundreds of billions of dollars worth of   people who are very angry, very upset uh   because they are trapped in a student   debt that will not go away for decades.   >> Rashi Sunnak, the former prime minister   of the UK wrote an article last week   which you might have seen where he said   that if the UK fails to fix its   productivity problems and seize the AI   opportunity, the country risks becoming   a tourist theme park.

  >> Yeah. Not even a good tourist theme   park. you know, there's there's, you   know, there's not a lot, you know, at   least a lot of other countries have   beaches and mountain ranges and ski   resorts and, you know, the UK doesn't   have a lot of that. We have to let   markets function. The issue that we   have, and this is this is actually a   trap that you're falling into is trying   to figure out top down, how do we   organize society, which is socialism,   right? The top down approach of trying   to fix this problem for everybody is the   socialist mindset. And it does it it   doesn't work. If you were the prime   minister   >> Yeah.   >> and you you can see the future that's   coming.   >> Yeah.   >> What would you do?   >> So the number one thing the UK needs to   do is reduce government involvement   where we need to get the government   spending down less than 35%.   >> Where'd you cut?   >> Right. So the key thing that you need is   that you need well there's loads of   places to cut, right? Like getting   involved in trying to do wind farms and   solar farms and all of this 40 billion   and all this sort of stuff. Preventing   companies from accessing natural gas

  that is just sitting under our feet is a   crazy thing to do. Spending 20 billion   trying to give away one of our islands   to someone is a crazy thing to do.   There's all sorts of crazy things that   the government is spending money on.   Bureaucracy is a crazy spend. Do you   know that the um Birmingham City   Council, they wanted to migrate from SAP   to Oracle   >> and from a CRM system with SAP to a CRM   system with Oracle, a software system,   right? So they wanted to migrate from   one software system to another software   system. They thought that it would cost   £19 million which in itself is a very   high amount to migrate from one software   to another software. It cost £220   million.   >> So are you saying that you think the   government should just do less stuff?   >> They should be involved in less stuff   because what's happening right now is   that there is so   much government spending that the   benefits for succeeding are being eroded   by taxation and people are just leaving.   See, here's the thing. There's with   capitalism, the only benefit of

  capitalism is the creative   entrepreneurial process, right? That   creative entrepreneurial process that   produces amazing companies and amazing   innovations and it creates stuff that is   better, faster, and cheaper for   everybody's lives. That comes from   capitalism. But if you take away the   incentives for doing that, you   essentially don't have that happen   within your country.

 And then as soon as   you don't have that, you don't have any   economic growth. And then as soon as you   don't have any economic growth, all   you're left with is the debt. And the   debt erodess your economy and kills your   economy and you don't have any growth to   counterbalance the debt. So you enter a   downward spiral.

 And that is basically   the same socialist scam that happens   over and over again everywhere that it's   tried. You're essentially trying to get   rid of the worst elements of an economy,   which is cronyism and extraction. But   that happens under socialism. you just   simply lose the one thing that doesn't   happen under socialism which is the   creative process, the entrepreneurial   process, the innovative process that   creates new value in the economy.

 So   what we've currently done in the UK,   we've taken away all incentives for   people to be in the UK and to succeed.   I'm sure you know people personally who   are no longer in the UK as tax   residents, who should be in the UK as   tax residents. They like the UK, they   enjoyed living in the UK, but what   happened? they left.

 You and I had a   debate with a guy a year ago and he   said, "Oh no, people are not going to   leave the UK. We can tax them as high as   we possibly can. We can ramp up the   taxes."   >> Gary Stevenson.   >> Yeah, Gary Stevenson. And Gary's   prediction was that rich people are not   going to leave. And he also predicted   that the house prices are going to   explode and that we're going to have   these horrible house prices.

 What's   happened? Housing market has gone flat   because people are leaving. the   economically active produ producers,   providers, they have left in their   droves and the economy is now in real   trouble. If you ask anyone who has left,   what do they tell you is the reason that   they left the UK?   >> Well, it's one of two things.

 It's   generally, I think they feel a sense of   pessimism about building their future in   a place that that feels like it's   unmanaged decline to some people.   >> And then the other cohort will say tax   reasons,   >> high taxes and and it just feels like   you can't get ahead. And also the third   I'd say is they they think that talent   is elsewhere.

 So they think they have a   better chance of getting capital and   talent employees if they move to America   or Dubai or wherever else.   >> Yep. And if you go to Dubai low taxes   and if you go to America lower taxes um   more opportunities. So we are living in   a time where you know a lot of countries   are exploring this socialism thing and   unfortunately it's a scam.

 But even   what's interesting is even your mindset   is we need to fix this top down as   opposed to fix it bottom up. With AI, we   need to give people price data, price   signals.   >> What does that mean?   >> It means that they need to be able to   see what's happening in in the economy.   A young person needs to know that   someone's making a lot of profit.

 They   need to be able to see there is   opportunities to do this, there's   opportunities to do that. They need to   also see, oh, this is no longer an   opportunity. So, this was great. This   was a great opportunity 5 years ago, but   it's not such a great opportunity now. A   lot of young people are going to   discover, oh, wait a second.

 I could get   into house renovations because a lot of   houses need renovating. And they go,   "Oh, cool. I've heard about someone   who's making money doing that. I'm going   to go do that." So, that's just having   access to price data.   >> When I look back over the last couple of   years, data from Henley and Partners in   2023, it says 3,200 millionaires net   left the UK.

 In 2024, 9,500 millionaires   net left the UK. In 2025, projected   16,500   millionaires are expected to leave the   UK, which is a record outflow. And   predictions that have not yet been   published warn that the trend is likely   to continue into 2026. When you think   about this, like I guess there's two   questions, which is why does this   matter?   >> Mhm.

  >> And then the next question is what   should I do about it on an individual   level?   >> So why does it matter is because 1% of   people pay for 30% of the bills and uh   10% of people pay 60% of the bills. So   if those people leave then those bills   get passed on to everybody. We've seen   this here in New York.

 So we're at the   moment we're in New York and this   socialist mayor Mandani has basically   just come out today and said we need to   put everybody's taxes up because we need   to spread the bills of the city across   all the residents um because people are   leaving. Right. So he wants to propose a   9.

5% tax rise on all people uh who who   own homes regardless of the value of   those homes. So essentially when rich   people leave they leave behind a lot of   bills that everybody else has to pay   that they were previously paying.   >> In his February 2026 preliminary budget,   New York Mayor Zorhan Mandani proposed a   9.

5% property tax increase to address a   projected 5.4 billion budget shortfall.   This proposal acts as a last resort   alternative to his preferred plan which   was increasing taxes on top earners and   corporations to fill the revenue gap. H   >> he promised free stuff and he promised   that everything was going to be paid for   for free. Nothing is free.

 Someone has   to pay for everything. If the rich   people leave, there is not people who   can pay for all the free stuff. And   that's what New York is suddenly   discovering. So why does it matter?   Because rich people essentially create   the growth. They are the high taxpayers.   whichever way you want to say it or   discover or discuss it.

 It is a small   group of people who pay a lot of the uh   taxes, you don't want those people to   leave the economy. What do you do about   it? The number one thing to do about it   is you need to identify the opportunity   that's right for you. That's called   founder opportunity fit. What you're   looking for is an opportunity where you   can earn money no matter where you are   in the world.

 If you're somewhere that   you don't perhaps like being for any   reason, you can pick up and move. Um, so   the best kind of businesses and the best   kind of opportunities at the moment are   the ones that are not geographically   limited to a particular city.   >> It says that in New York, personal tax   income remains pretty strong, but   business tax collections have started to   soften.

 Recent reports show they are   roughly 378 million lower than initially   projected as business formation slows   down in New York.   >> Yeah, it's the same story. We've seen   this over and over again. Um, socialism   is like a hot stove that every   generation has to touch for themselves.   that essentially every generation of   young people, they think they've   discovered something new.

 They think,   "Oh my goodness, what if we just go to   the rich people and take it off them and   give it to everybody else and we'll   redistribute the wealth." And even   though it's been tried for 180 years   since KL Marx came along, uh it just   doesn't work. It it is a disaster and it   ruins economies over and over and over   again.

 And trying to offer lots and lots   of free incentives without any   productivity gains is a downward spiral.   What's your bare case for the future of   AI?   >> Well, the bare case is that we have   something called the angles pause. The   angles pause is what happened in the   industrial age where for 50 years all   the wealth went to the top uh because of   the new technology of the   industrialization.

 When we went from   agriculture to industrial age, that new   technology displaced so many people that   there were revolutions off the back of   it.   >> I mean, this is going to be even faster   and more disruptive.   >> Yeah, it's very disruptive. Yeah. I said   this once before in a conversation I had   about AI, but I went to my friend's   accelerator in San Francisco, which used   to be a software accelerator.

 And when I   walked in there and went around, he has,   you know, so hundreds of entrepreneurs   in there building stuff. I was like, why   is everyone building robots? And he was   like, oh, because and he showed me this,   I said this in a couple of episodes ago,   showed me this frying pan which had an   arm, a robotic arm attached to it.

 And   he was like, cook your dinner for you.   >> Yeah.   >> And and he was like, so 10 years ago,   the expensive thing wasn't actually the   robotic arm. He's like, "All these   pieces, all these, they've been around   for for decades." He goes, "The   expensive thing was the intelligence."   >> He goes, "Now it costs sense.

 Back then   it would have cost me tens of thousands   to to buy the intell intelligence that   would know how to make your omelette for   you." So he goes, "What you're seeing   now is we're actually in the the   Renaissance age of robotics." And I   looked around everywhere. I was like,   "Oh, there's what's that machine over   there?" He goes, "That makes your   perfume for you in the morning." Yeah.

  >> You tell it how you want to smell today.   It makes it has all the sense loaded in   and it'll make you and you can see the   making   >> anything that is currently got a   Bluetooth in it will have intelligence   in it. So your toothbrush will tell you   whether you've brushed your teeth well   enough and book it'll probably be the   thing that books an appointment for your   dentist uh and all that sort of stuff.

  >> I'll go even further. I'd say even   things that don't like my bed sheet my   bed sheets my pillows my mattresses   >> and they they will all have access to   agents and all that sort of stuff. My   bare case for AI is not about the   intelligence side of things. I generally   believe that more intelligence means a   better society.

 Um, there's never been a   situation where lots of intelligence was   a bad thing. Um, so I think intelligence   has a pretty strong bullcase to it, but   financial bubbles are a real thing and   I've lived through a couple of them. And   what I've discovered is that they have   widespread massive impacts on all sorts   of areas of society that you wouldn't   even expect.

 And my real bare case for   AI is that we overinvest in these data   centers. We cause a massive financial   collapse. uh and that we wipe out   pension funds. I don't know if you know   this, but they're packaging up the debt   for these financial uh assets and   they're selling that to um pension funds   as private credit.

 So all of these huge   data centers, what they're doing is   paying 6% above inflation as a packaged   up debt. They send it over. Now when   they go to the pension funds, they say,   "Oh, this is backed by Google and backed   by Microsoft and backed by uh Amazon."   and then they say, "Oh, you know, it's a   6% um financial instrument backed by   these huge companies.

" But   unfortunately, the mathematics of   spending 600 billion a year on something   that only has a three or four year   lifespan, every single time in the last   180 years that we've spent more than 3%   of our economy on an infrastructure   buildout, we've ended up with either a   massive recession or a depression.   >> Did you hear the Anthropic CEO? For   anyone that doesn't know, Anthropic is   one of the large AI companies.

 Yeah,   they're they're the maker of Claude. Did   you hear what he was saying the other   day in the article he wrote about his   concerns?   >> Yeah. Yeah. I I saw at Davos.   >> Yeah. He wrote it just after he left   Davos. Um Daria Amed.   >> Yeah.   >> He said, "Humanity is about to be handed   almost unimaginable power, and it is   deeply unclear whether our social,   political, and technological systems   possess the maturity to wield it.

 I   believe we are entering a right of   passage, both turbulent and inevitable,   which will test who we are as a species.   We are considerably closer to real   danger in 2026 than we were in 2023.   If the exponential continues, which is   not certain, but now has a decade long   track record supporting it, then it   cannot possibly be more than a few years   before AI is better than humans at   essentially   >> everything.

  >> Everything. The same AI enabled tools   that are necessary to fight autocracies   can be turned inward to create tyranny   in our own countries. There is an   alarming possibility of global   totalitarian dictatorship. AI is so   powerful, such a glittering prize that   it is very difficult for human   civilization to impose any restraints on   it at all.

 And he said this remarkable   thing about um in that essay about   imagining if there was an island with   50,000   >> geniuses on it   >> a billion a billion geniuses on it.   >> Yeah.   >> What would happen to society? And I   think there's I don't know like do you   know what I hope I'm really wrong about   this but when I think about this idea   that there's 50 million geniuses on this   brand new island   >> and I ask myself   >> I'm willing to work for free.

  >> Willing to work for free. when one   learns something, they all learn   something.   >> You just take that as a first principle.   You go, hm, society is going to be very,   very, very, very different. And maybe   all of the advice we've been giving for   the last 5, 10 years about how to be   successful, how to be an entrepreneur,   how to succeed in business, maybe   >> it's for an economy that no longer   exists.

 Yeah, we're going for we're   going from a fundamental industrial age   economy to a AI age economy, right? That   is that is different. We will have   different economic models. We also have   a problem of aging. For all of human   history, we've had a small number of old   people at the top and a lot of young   people at the bottom.

 And we now have   65% of all wealth in the economy is held   by people over 65. And then you've got   the financialized economy and the   government economy which is inflationary   and that they pump money in as stimulus.   So while the entrepreneurs are making   everything cheaper, even free, the   governments are actually inflating the   economy and the financial systems   inflating the economy slightly faster   than productivity gains.

 Right? So   what's happening is the entrepreneurs   bring down the cost of everything and   the governments and the financial system   top it up with new stimulus. According   to the rules that the government runs   by, as AI creates huge deflationary   impacts, they can actually just inflate   the economy like unbelievably.

 they can   pump huge amounts of stimulus into the   economy. So this whole idea of um UBI,   universal basic income, it actually   stacks up from economic fundamentals   basics uh principles uh where you can   actually provided you're getting the   productivity gains where things are   costing zero because of AI, you can   actually just pump money into the   economy and give give money away for a   period of time while we're going through   that transition.

 Hopefully that prevents   massive craziness from unfolding. And   hopefully as a result of having a huge   amount of intelligence, we find really   interesting fun ways to structure   society and do things.   We're not necessarily leaving utopia. We   shouldn't necessarily be grieving the   loss of shitty jobs and grieving the   loss of dehumanizing   low connectivity jobs.

 We have ruined   the way that we pair bond. We've ruined   the way that we do community. We've   ruined the way that families run. We've   got people working two jobs just to   survive. Like that's not something to be   grieving the loss of. We need a new   system. Maybe AI is going to actually   give us the breathing room that we need   to actually create a system that gets us   back to a little bit towards the way   that humans have flourished.

  >> Are we going to go to towards UBI?   >> It seems like in the short term that   would have to be the case. So Sam   Alman's over here working to build open   AI, working 24 hours a day. Let's just   say theoretically.   >> Um we're going to have to take some of   his hard work away and give it to   theoretically we're going to have to   give it to someone who is maybe not   working.

  >> Yeah. And I mean Sam Alman, funny   enough, he actually backed a study   called Open Research in 2024 that looked   at the impact of UBI. And it showed that   recipients who received UBI, which is   money basically given to them, worked   fewer hours and earned less money than   the control group.

 Instead of using the   freedom to find better jobs to improve   their education, many participants   simply dropped off the workforce or   reduced hours for leisure, resulting in   a net decrease in household income   despite cash payments.   >> Yeah, humans want stuff to do. We need a   we need a meaningful struggle. We need   something that we um that we're up to in   the world.

 And that is that is a very   difficult thing. The likely thing that I   think will probably happen is that these   data center investments will be so   catastrophic financially that   governments will have to bail them out.   And then the governments will have to   own all the data and all the data   centers and then the tech companies will   have to essentially pay royalties back   to the government over long periods of   time to manage this kind of uh   infrastructure buildout.

 So you'll have   to have something where the government   actually owns the primary asset and that   is the thing that pays for the UBI. I   mean we're we're kind of theorizing and   just kind of   >> we're going to find out.   >> We are going to find out.   >> This is going to be on the internet   someday.   >> The mathematics bend reality at age at   about 2029 once you the financial   engineering required to make this thing   work.

 You need something like a 45 times   growth in the number of people paying   for subscriptions and the number of   businesses. Like you take something that   is over the last uh 5 10 years there's   been a product that has gone exponential   which is ampic and GLP1 weight loss   drugs the amount of spend to build out   and satisfy that demand is actually   pretty minimal.

 Those companies spend   about 20% of their revenues building new   factories to produce new GLP drugs.   Right? So capex is about 20% of revenue.   We're seeing with the AI stuff, capex is   hundreds of percent of revenue, right?   So, it is a financial feat that we've   never attempted before.   >> I've had so many founders speak to me   and say, "Why didn't this particular ad   that I ran on this platform work for me?   Maybe the copy wasn't good, the creative   wasn't strong, but usually the problem   is they're not having the right   conversation because that ad never   reached the right person." And if you're   in B2B marketing, that is much of the   game. And this is where LinkedIn ads   solves that problem for you. Their   targeting is ridiculously specific. You   can target by job title, seniority,   company size, industry, and even   someone's skill set. And their network   includes over a billion professionals.   About 130 million of them are decision   makers. So when you use LinkedIn ads,   you're putting your brand in front of   the right people. And LinkedIn ads also

  drive the highest B2B return on ad spend   across all ad networks in my experience.   If you want to give them a try, head   over to linkedin.com/diary.   And when you spend $250 on your first   LinkedIn ads campaign, you'll get an   extra $250 credit from me for the next   one. That's linkedin.com/diary.   Terms and conditions apply.

 We have   finally caved in. So many of you have   asked us if we could bundle the   conversation cards with the 1% diary.   For those of you that don't know, every   single time a guest sits here with me in   the chair, they leave a question in the   diary of a CEO and then I ask that   question to the next guest.

 We don't   release those questions in any   environment other than on these   incredible conversation cards. These   have become a fantastic tool for people   in relationships, people in teams, in   big corporations, and also family   members to connect with each other. With   that, we also have the 1% diary, which   is this incredible tool to change habits   in your life.

 So many of you have asked   if it was possible to buy both at the   same time, especially people in big   companies. So, what we've done is we've   bundled them together and you can buy   both at the same time. And if you want   to drive connection and instill habit   change in your company, head to the   diary.

com to inquire and our team will   be in touch.   >> Let's bring this back to uh   >> back to reality,   >> the reality of the person listening and   uh the pressing questions they have   about all this stuff and what they   should do. Is there anything else that   you would give people that are listening   right now in terms of advice to be able   to weather the incoming turbulence that   the CEO of Anthropic describes there?   Yeah, look, the things that I know are   good for people is I really believe that   everyone should build a little bit of a   personal brand. So, a personal brand   means that 2 to 20,000 people know who   you are. They know what you do. They   know you what your experiences are like.   They could approach you about an   opportunity that would be a good   opportunity. So, build a bit of a   personal brand. Don't be invisible uh in   this particular time because you know it   is one of your assets which is to take   some of your knowledge some of your   playbooks and to let people know that   that exists. So I think build a bit of a   personal brand. Second one is have a go

  at entrepreneurship, right? Join an   entrepreneurial team, do an   entrepreneurial side hustle, read some   entrepreneurial books, watch some   entrepreneurial um videos that are out   there. start the process of thinking,   okay, the school system taught me to be   a standardized uh employee, a   standardized labor.

 Uh the school system   wanted me to fit in with an office or a   factory, but actually there's this whole   other way of creating value which is   non-standardized called   entrepreneurship. This is spotting   opportunities and coming up with   solutions to it. So, you know, play   around with the game, even if it's a   small game.

 Like you might notice that   there are dirty cars on the street and   you might say, "You know what? I'm going   to go and knock on doors and wash the   cars and see if I can make a couple   hundred bucks in a day because I've seen   an opportunity. I've seen something   that's wrong and I I'm going to go and   have a go at fixing it."   >> A lot of founders are telling me, Mark   Cuban said the other day that one of the   great opportunities now is   catering for the gap between small   business owners that don't know how to   use AI and helping them learn how to use   AI.   >> Yeah. Huge, right? Join a join a join a   founder team and help them do that. Um   as I said as well 65% of all the   businesses by valuation are people over   65 now. So there is a mathematical   certainty that 2/3 of the businesses   that run the economy by valuation have   to change hands in the next 10 15 20   years. So this is a massive business   opportunity. Uh baby boomers want to get   rid of their businesses. They want to   retire. Baby boomers are willing to fund   you to buy their business if you present   yourself well if you've got a little bit   of a personal brand. So, that's a that's   a huge opportunity. So, look into that.

  Um, you know, Cody Sanchez, a mutual   friend of ours, she talks to people all   the time about how to buy a baby boomer   business and and take it over and run   it. So, um, you know, that's a that's a   great opportunity. Play with these toys   called AI tools. Someone has given you a   free iPhone which you can just use   called AI tools um on the free account.

  That is such good advice that we don't   hear enough because I think people think   there's where I am right now in my life   and what I do and then there's like Sam   Alman and Elon Musk and I I either I'm   one or the other but actually what I'm   seeing as an employer who's employing we   probably employ I'd say 20 people a   month at current rate.

  >> We're hiring 20 more people a month   >> is increasingly on our culture test when   we're screening who the right candidates   are. We're looking for some kind of   evidence that they're playing or messing   around with AI.   >> Yeah.   >> And one of my team members   >> is she was trying to figure out how to   get a 100 different documents   to synthesize and understand the data   within these documents.

 Now, there's two   types of people I can hire to do that.   There's the old fashioned way of doing   that where someone might sit there for   four or five weeks and try to figure out   how to get an Excel document to have the   right formulas. And then there's her who   we hired. Even though she doesn't have   skills in that particular thing, she has   no experience in it.

 But because of her   mindset and her agency, she went, "Hm,   maybe I could put this into Claude   Co-work and ask set up an agent to run   this for me   >> by the time dessert came." She pulled   her laptop over to me and showed it to   me. And she goes, "Stephen, I've ran all   those hundreds of documents um into this   file and I can see the sentiment on   every single post you've made on every   single social platform, including every   LinkedIn post you've made over the last   couple of years.

 And we can see that   actually even though these point posts   get more likes, these ones are actually   the best posts you're doing."   >> She did that by dessert.   >> Yeah.   >> That and I thought there a isn't that   interesting. How do you find people who   have that bias in the modern world where   they lean into change? She's not   curiosity, isn't it?   >> Yeah.

 It's curiosity, but there's also   something which is like and being fluid   about your identity and what you know.   >> Yes.   >> Which is she has no experience in that.   >> But I can try.   >> I can try.   >> And the one thing for anyone watching or   listening is that don't use AI as a   search tool. Don't use it the way you   used it a year ago.

 Give AI your hardest   problem and say, "Hey, help me to solve   this problem." So, for example, you   might say, "I'm really struggling with   these areas of my life. Here's all the   data. Here's all the information. Here's   the PDF documents. Here's the, you know,   the the backstory. Help me solve this.   Help me write it.

 What kind of piece of   software might I be able to use to to to   build here?" I'll give you a real   example. One of our team members used AI   to analyze all the sales calls for the   last 3 months and discovered a huge   opportunity. What they discovered is   that 75% of all of our sales calls, the   person who we were on the phone to   mentioned that their spouse was a   decision maker and that they needed to   talk to their spouse and that decision-m   because it was a family business and   that there was either a spouse or a   family member. There was no point in our   process where we invited collaboration   with other family members. So none of   our sales calls said, "Do you want to   bring someone along to the sales call?   Like would you like to have someone do   that?" The AI analyzed it, discovered   that opportunity, wrote a script as to   how to invite people onto the call so   that that you get all decision makers on   the call and now our sales conversions   are going up dramatically.   >> I think this is the the real bification   in terms of the employment market of   what we're seeing is certain people have   a a positive relationship to disruption

  in technology and change. They get   excited by it where others fall into   cognitive dissonance where they they get   so concerned that it's going to take out   their business that they ostrich head in   the sand. And then the these other   people have this in inherent figure out   ability.

 I could say to a certain team   member of mine, here's a big problem and   they would grab onto this big problem   and even though they have no proficiency   in data or technology or AI or CL, they   will just they'll plug away at it on a   computer and they'll figure it out and   they'll use all available tools, not   their identity, what they learned in   university or their experience as the   only tool in the tool box.

 That's the   difference between employee mindset and   entrepreneur mindset. Entrepreneurs see   problems as opportunities. They get   excited by problems and they apply the   entrepreneurial process. And employees   say, "Hey, wait a second. I was never   trained for this. I was never told how   to do this.

 I was not given the rulebook   for this. So therefore, I'll just ignore   it. I'll stay away from it because   problems, it's not my problem." And this   is the big fundamental shift. We need to   say, "Hey, problems are great. We want   problems. And is this problem for me?   How would I test my assumptions? How   would I build something quickly and   cheaply? How would I then test that? How   would they I then scale that? Right? And   it's just those kind of few steps that   if you embrace those entrepreneurial   steps, then life becomes great.

  >> I have a contrarian take that I think   writing is actually more important now   than ever before because writing is a   proxy of understanding. And in a world   of AI, what I'm finding when I look at   like my innovation teams or where   breakthroughs are coming from in my   company, it's actually someone had a   really good question.

  >> Yes.   >> So they were like, could we   theoretically analyze all of our sales   calls using Claude to see if there's   something interesting in there? Now that   starts with someone understanding sales   calls, understanding the tools that   allow you to analyze them. They have   lots of reference points. They   understand lots of um variant things.

  And that means they ask a really great   question. So for me, one of the ways   that I've been um been able to   understand more things is to to write   more often about them.   >> Can I go one step further?   >> And that is a process called pause   reflect document. And pause reflect   document.

 If you do it correctly, you go   into nature away from noise and away   from technology and you take a pen and a   paper and you sit in nature on a bench   and you just pause and just let some   boredom set in. You reflect on what's   going on. You try and zoom out to the   bigger picture. You do some journaling   and you do some dot connecting where you   say, "What are some of the dots that   have happened in the last 5 years? What   are some of the bigger picture impacts   that I've made? What are some of the   problems that I've struggled with? What   if this was possible? What if that was   possible?" We live in this incredible   fast-paced world where the one thing   that no one allows themselves to do is   to pause, reflect, document with a pen   and paper. And those people who I know   who are doing incredibly well are doing   more and more of this.   >> Yeah.   >> Yeah.   >> Same same. I mean, you're one of them.   You're a person who's I mean, look at   this.   >> Yeah.   >> This is a lot of books.   >> That's my head.

  >> But you tweet every day. You post every   day. You're constantly experiencing   something in the real world, writing it   down to develop your thinking, which   Richard Fryman talks about the process   of understanding where you learn   something, condense it, so an average   person can understand it, then you share   it with the world to collect feedback on   that thought.

 He said that's the like   the fastest best way to learn. Yeah.   Yeah,   >> but actually in a world of AI where chat   can do all of that for me, we're   deferring our ability to sort of   condense, compress, and understand to an   AI because we think it's creating an   efficiency gain or a productivity gain   in the near term.

 Like maybe today's   email will will save you 30 seconds, but   that the tax you're paying I think is an   understanding.   >> And understanding is the is a proxy of   therefore, you know, writing great   questions.   >> I find myself writing more. I wrote a   memo this I was up till 2 a.m. last   night writing a memo.   >> Yeah.   which means you were up late thinking.

  >> You were thinking clearly and that was   what you were really doing. A great   question I want people to reflect on. I   want them to think about the last 5   years and ask the question when did I do   something special   that impacted a certain type of person.   I can explain how I did it step by step   and how it felt and it would be of   interest to plenty of people. All right.

  And that question contains what we   talked about earlier which is lived   experience feelings playbooks and   connecting the dots looking backwards   and actually coming up with some things   that only I can do things that only I   can say. So that that particular prompt   that particular question to sit in   nature and think clearly and memo and   and document and write a memo about it.

  You know I I see so many people and you   and I have done this over the last   couple hours. We think so much about the   future and the uncertainty of the future   but a lot of value comes from just   looking backwards and connecting the   dots and then thinking what what is it   that I now know that I want to take   forward and add value to others.

 sort of   adjacent to that but related is another   thing I think a lot about which is um   trying to get more information and   experiences from a wide set of reference   points because when I think about   innovation generally innovation is the   connection of like two ideas or thoughts   or principles that someone else hasn't   put together so I think about the like   non-stick frying pan it was a guy who   was fishing and was trying to make get a   material so his tackle his fishing   tackle didn't stick together and his   wife walks past allegedly and says, "I'd   love some of that stuff on our pans."   And that ends up selling tens and tens   of millions of non-stick pans. And even   the even when you think about the   iPhone, that was a combination of a of   an internet device,   >> a music device,   >> and a telecommunications device   >> put together, which you rarely found   those three things in one space. Three   different reference points. To achieve   that, someone would have had to   understand music, the internet, and   phones.   >> Yeah. Yeah. And even Steve Jobs himself,

  his skill stack contains typography and   design which is why why he was able to   disrupt Blackberry.   >> He stumbled into a calligraphy class at   university and loved calligraphy and he   was the first company to ever have fonts   and those fonts became a huge   differentiator on the first Mac and it   was only because he had like combined   calligraphy with uh with with computers   he created the font uh idea.

  >> So maybe the future's owned by the wide   not the narrow in this regard.   definitely become more of a generalist,   become more curious and go out of your   comfort zones, right? The the industrial   age asked us to simply specialize and do   one thing over and over. The grandfather   of capitalism is a guy called Adam Smith   and he said ultimately efficiency is   about doing one thing in the process   over and over and over, but he said it's   going to destroy the human spirit.

 He   actually wrote about the fact that that   destroys the human spirit. having to   just twist this knob over and over that   creates the most value in the economy,   but it's horrible for you as a human.   And what and he recognized that problem   from the very beginning. What we've been   trained to do is just twist the knob,   twist the knob, twist the knob, do the   same thing over and over.

 What we need   to relearn how to do is allow us to   become more human and say, "Actually,   I'm going to explore nature. I'm going   to explore this weird passion that I   have for um, you know, particular   theater companies and how they run. I'm   going to go and explore this thing about   like entrepreneur accelerators.

 Um, you   know, I'm going to combine things. It's   those rare combinations and you need to   trust your instincts that you're   actually pulling on a few threads and   bringing them together. I do that while   still focusing on a job, etc. Because I   do this for a living.   >> So, I get to sit here, you know, someone   walked in before you and they were   talking to, you know, Alex Honold was   talking to me in that chair before you.

  That's why the little taipe statues   behind us about, you know, then you've   talked to me today about this, then the   next person will talk to me about   neuroscience and bringing a human brain.   And that's allowed me to kind of connect   these interesting reference points. What   I'm saying here is you don't need to   like   >> quit your job and go and live in Peru to   to to orchestrate your life in such a   way.

 I think you just need to be really   intentional about resisting the urge to   be a narrow person and to identify too   much with one's identity. And so when I   left my former business, one of the   chapters I wrote my book is how do I now   resist all my labels? Because now I'm a   social media CEO. And it's so tempting,   >> yeah,   >> to gather around social media people, go   to social media parties, put it in my   bio, get social media opportunities, and   just go further and further and further   down that narrow line.

 So that's why I   went and worked in psychedelics and   biotech. I worked in cancer biotech. I   started to DJ. I started a podcast   called The Diary of a CEO. I tried to do   as many things as I possibly could to   remain wide. Yeah. And your superpowers   are extra superpowers when you take them   somewhere new.   >> So if you've got social media   superpowers within the social media   bubble, everyone's got those   superpowers.

 But if you go and take them   into a completely new place, you   discover that actually what you what you   learned over here becomes a massive   differentiator over here.   >> Is there anything else the audience need   to know about the big opportunities you   see as we head into the future?   >> We all want the future to be bright. We   all want the future to be uh amazing and   we love the idea of trying to improve   the world.

 One of the best ways to   improve the world is to improve your own   situation because the world is made up   of people who have their own situation.   You know when we try and fix every   problem on the planet it feels   completely crushing and it feels so much   weight on your shoulders. when you   actually say what's my opportunity like   if I could if I improve the world by   building myself a really great business   that helps a few people that helps 500   clients do something and if I'm actually   out there adding value in my unique way   and I'm finding a way through this AI   weird adventure that we're going on   that's actually helping the world right   so you're bringing yourself forward   you're discovering something I really   want people to resist the trap of trying   to fix everyone and fix everything try   and figure out what is your opportunity   What is your way of adding value to   others? What is your way of getting   paid? What is your way of doing creative   entrepreneurship? Uh what's your   contribution to the world? And that is   actually a contribution.   >> Is that difficult to do? Because I think   it assumes certain level of

  self-awareness that is not always easy.   >> If you find it difficult to do, find   someone who inspires you and see if you   can join their team. So that's totally a   valid move as well, right? just get onto   a team where someone's figuring this   stuff out. Um, you know, follow your   inspiration and sometimes your   inspiration is to start something.

  Sometimes your in inspiration is to help   propel something forward, being part of   someone else's team who does inspire   you. Self-awareness is is a skill that   we all have to learn. We're all on a   crash course with reality. Every single   one of us is on a crash course with   reality.

 There's a lot of narrative on   on the internet that everybody can live   their dream, you know, and I   wonder whether every it's good I wonder   whether it's good advice to tell   everybody to like quit their job and   pursue their dream.   >> I believe that the new size of business   that makes the most sense is small and   dynamic and lean and is probably close   to 10 to 50 people.

 Um, and that is the   new size of company that is really   shaking things up and doing stuff. In   fact, it's probably 2 to 20 people. I   think that being part of a small,   dynamic, vibrant, entrepreneurial team   is a great place for people to go and   have a look and explore. Does that mean   that everyone's suitable to quit their   job and go start something from scratch   with a blank piece of paper? Probably   not, right? That's that's a particular   role called the founder.

 Not everyone's   ready to be a founder. In the same way,   everyone could probably get a black belt   if they if they joined a martial arts   and stuck with it. But not everyone can   start as a black belt. That's not where   you start   >> even in those numbers. So if we said   everyone's gonna have, you know, a team   of 10 to 50, those numbers suggest that   one in 50 or one in 10 people are going   to be a founder.

  >> Possibly a lot more people are going to   be founders. I really believe a lot more   people are going to be founders. I also   don't think it's wildly unnatural to be   a founder. If you go through all of   history, most people worked in little   family businesses. That was actually the   vast majority of people.

 Mo, you know,   most businesses never got past 30   people. That our natural way of being is   in family groups and tribal groups and   little groups of less than 150 people.   We've built up this idea that to be a   founder means Steve Jobs, Elon Musk or   something massive like that and that   you're trying to build something that   changes the world.

 I've got so many   friends and clients who it's them, their   assistant, and uh someone who's like   head of customer development, and   there's three or four of them, and   they're having a great time, and they're   doing 600, 700 grand worth of revenue,   and they got loads of flexibility.   Everyone takes their kids to school.   Everyone finishes up at 4 4 p.m.

 Um they   can travel, they can live and work   anywhere. Um you know, that's really   cool. This is your most recent book,   Lifestyle Business Playbooks: How to   Have Fun, Freedom, and Fulfillment with   Your Own Business. You've written a lot   of books. You could have written a book   about anything.

 What's this book about   and who is it for?   >> This book is about the times that we're   living in, right? So, what I'm trying to   do, I'm trying to give people some hope.   There's such a negative narrative that   AI is going to wipe out everything and   that technology is going to destroy   everything and that, you know, all this   negativity about the times that we're   in.

 I'm trying to create a   counternarrative that actually more than   any other time in history, you could   live and work from anywhere. You could   have a group of 500 to a few thousand   clients all over the world. You could   add value to people in a unique and   interesting way. You could have a career   that's based on randomness and   creativity and fun.

 And that there are   some new rules to play by. and that if   you learn the playbooks of   entrepreneurship and if you learn the   trends that are unfolding that actually   it could work out really really well for   you.   >> A lot of people want to, you know, they   want a side hustle, they want passive   income.

 What's your general perspective   on the reality of being able to generate   passive income and a side hustle? I   think passive income reflects people's   desire that they currently feel that   they're working really hard and they   hate work and they hate going to work   and that earning money is a horrible   thing and therefore they just wish it   would just kind of take care of itself.

  The truth is that when you discover what   I would call a lifestyle business where   you work a reasonable amount of time and   you have a lot of fun with great people,   you don't necess the as if by magic the   desire for passive income just   evaporates. you go, "This is this is   better than passive income because I'm   on a creative journey and I'm making   great money and I'm having a lot of fun   and I'm expressing myself.

" I think   passive income ultimately comes from   assets. It's not it's not passive   income, it's asset income. Um, you're   either going to have to create an asset,   which could be a business that is a   digital asset. Um, or you make so much   money in your lifestyle business that   you own traditional assets like houses   or stocks and shares and all that sort   of stuff.

 Um, but I'm not really   focusing people on the idea of passive   income. I'm focusing on the idea of   having a lifestyle business that   supports the way you want to live.   Anyway,   >> a lot of people would would want that,   but they're scared, right? They're   scared that they have to quit their job   and I've got a mortgage to pay.

 I've got   kids. So, it's easier said than done,   Daniel.   >> Yeah. So, that that's why in the   playbooks, playbook one is called a side   hustle or an apprenticeship. So, an   apprenticeship, let's say let's say you   currently earn $100,000 a year for uh a   really big corporate, but you know   that's not your future.

 An   apprenticeship might be that you join   four boards for 20 25,000 each and you   actually work with some startups that   are more entrepreneurial and you take a   position where you have four companies   that are paying 25 grand. So you still   earn 100 grand a year but now you've got   four smaller startups that you're   learning from and they're learning from   you and you're learning from them.

 So   that's that's a version of an   apprenticeship. Um, an apprenticeship   could also be that you go from working   for a big traditional company to getting   a job that pays almost as much but with   a smaller, more interesting business   that you can learn from a founder. A   side hustle is where you do stuff on the   side and it's open and shut.

 You build   your entrepreneurial confidence. So   those are like starting points and then   after that and the these are not   designed to make a big leap financially.   After that we talk about a twoerson   scout team scouting an opportunity. We   talk about a fourperson fire starting   team getting something started.

 We talk   about an eightp person core team running   a really cool little lifestyle business.   So it it it's not like people think that   they have to go from zero to 100 in one   jump. And it's like no, there are little   steps along the way that make this   really easy.   >> I think uh it's really important with   all of this advice to like know your   nature and to know who you are and kind   of honestly to like know what you want   from life,   >> which a lot of people don't and they're   handed what they want from life from   like scrolling on Instagram or LinkedIn.   and they cool   >> I need to build a $5 billion AI company   etc. I think I've I've noticed with   myself that I started a business. I was   really I was ambitious about the goals   for that business and then you know I   ran that business for some time. I left   that business when I was what 20 maybe   20 years old. Went to work in Silicon   Valley as basically a consultant.   >> Mhm.   >> And that was okay for a time being but   then eventually I realized that   >> the money really doesn't m it's really   about like doing it with people you like   and having a and having a challenge. So   that then led me back into the ambitious

  building businesses. Did that for six   years. But big big business around the   world   >> and then left that and then I went   through a period where   >> I guess I was kind of a consultant   freelancery type guy for a while again   fundamentally unfulfilling for me.   >> Yep.   >> Because going on a mission with a group   of people, an audacious mission really   regardless of what it is that filled me   up. It was never really about the money.

  >> A lot of people discover this. A lot of   people discover that more is not better.   Uh, a lot of people discover that bigger   is not more fun. Do   >> you know what else they discover? They   discover that their idea of independence   and freedom is also not what they   thought. And this is like a quite a   contrarian take, but I have more   responsibility now than I've ever had.

  >> Yeah.   >> I could choose less responsibility, more   freedom, and I would be less satisfied   and less fulfilled in my life.   >> Totally. Look at rich kids. They've   they've got everything taken care of,   and there's all this financial resource   around them, and there's nothing for   them to do.

 They live in a constant   state of depression. We love   responsibility. We love creative   tension. Uh we love being up to   something in the world. There's nothing   greater than being up to something to   being on a mission, especially with a   great group of people that you're   traveling through life with that you're   on this rock with.

 Um and you find your   group of people that you want to be up   to something with and you natter and you   solve and you get curious and you run   ideas past each other and you voice note   at 2:00 in the morning. You know, that's   that's where the juice is. That's where   the joy is. Um there's a chapter in   there that says know when enough is   enough.

 And it says that a huge part of   the times that we're in is you know we   live in a time of endless scrolling.   There's no cue that says you've been   scrolling long enough you know go to   bed. And it's same with business that we   think bigger would be better. Having a   bit bigger business another you know   another product another thing another uh   million would make you happier.

 And the   truth is it's it's not the it's normally   not the case. Well, what is the case   though is that we all need increasing   levels of challenge. It seems to me, you   know, this is why crosswords get more   difficult and video games get have   levels because they realize through the   studies that when something becomes   incrementally more difficult, you drop   into a flow state and motivation   increases and if it doesn't, then you   lose motivation.

 And so, I think this is   why even in my life, like I'm striving   to make things bigger and better because   it's actually just a proxy of like I   want to be challenged.   >> Well, there's a couple of things. You   can either go really big with one thing   and just be really really focused or you   can have challenge across a portfolio of   interests.

 One thing that is happening   to your generation, if I can be so bold,   cuz I'm just 15 years older or whatever,   is that you've taken all the energy that   normally went into kids and you're   putting it into business, right? And the   normal natural thing that is meant to   happen around this age is that you're   meant to struggle with a business or   struggle with a way of providing and   also struggle with raising kids and all   that sort of stuff.

 So there's this   reservoir of creative energy that is   meant to be divided amongst a few   projects. And I'm seeing a lot of people   that that misplaced maternalism or   paternalism goes into just one thing and   then we're expecting to get the joy and   the fulfillment that would normally come   back from family   >> and we wonder why that's missing.

 You   know, it's like, oh, I'm pouring myself   into the creation of these companies and   they're proxies for kids. And it's like,   why don't I feel this warmth back? Cuz   your biology is not wired to receive   warmth back from something other than a   kid. So this is happening because we're   not having we're not having kids.

 So one   of the things that uh well one of the   things I encourage everyone to do is   have kids because it's the best thing   ever and to have a portfolio of   interests that you don't have to   struggle to get to a billion. You could   say, you know what, the business   bucket's full at 3 million and I'm   really really happy with a revenue of 3   million in a team of 10 and now I want   to have a portfolio of interests that   includes health and fitness or travel or   teaching at a local uh you know youth   group, you know, or I want to play a   bigger role in my church. Like there's   all these other things that you say,   okay, these are the portfolio of   interests that that are more human.   >> Lifestyle business playbook. going to   link this book below for anyone that   wants to give it a read who is compelled   by the lifestyle that Dan has described   there where you can have fun, freedom   and fulfillment with your own business.   As you know, Daniel, cuz this is, I   think, is your seventh time being on   this podcast. Record breaker. We have a   closing tradition. The question that has   been left for you is, what fear have you

  overcome to become who you are today?   You know, I grew up on the Sunshine   Coast. Uh, I dropped out of school or I   dropped out of university. I've got zero   qualifications.   Um,   I'm not particularly good at anything in   particular. I've got no skills. Yeah,   there's me at 21. I tell you, this was a   huge fear.

 Running my first ad in the   newspaper. I put everything on a credit   card just to run an ad in the newspaper   for $8,000. and it had to work or else I   was in serious trouble.   >> I've had a weird 25 years. I've boom   busted over and over again. Um, so I had   a massive boom in my early 20s, built a   $10 million company rapidly and then   lost it.

 And then I built another   multi-million dollar business and then   lost it. And then I got wiped out by a   co experience and had to reinvent the   business. And then I had a negative   experience with a co-founder and had to   reinvent the team. So I've had these   kind of like huge forif for for the   first 15 years it was boom bust boom   bust boom bust and the fear was is that   it would never feel a sense of   fulfillment.

 I'd never get to a place   where I could actually say it was all   worth it. Um and to just keep going and   going and going when I felt exhausted uh   was a massive thing. You know have a   family.   >> Yeah. and the fear of will I be able to   provide for the family and the fear of   uh will my business ideas be valued by   anyone else other than myself? Am I   doing something stupid? Am I doing   something um that will fail again? So,   it's been a lot of fear.

 Um but you know   what? It's been a wonderful journey that   every time I've pushed through that   fear, we get to the other side. And   actually, it's better on the other side.   It's even better. Had you known how hard   it would be, do you think that   21-year-old Daniel would have done it?   >> I don't think I had any other choice.

  >> But if I'd sat that Daniel down and I'd   say, "Daniel, this is what's going to   happen in the next 20 years. You're   going to go up and then you're going to   lose it all. Then you go up, you lose it   all. You're going to feel like this at   this moment. It's going to be the worst   day.

 Then you're going to feel like this   and then this and then this and you're   going to be working hard the whole time.   Then you're going to lose faith."   Would you have done it?   >> Secretly, yes. And the reason for that   is I kind of I kind of like the roller   coaster. Feel like I needed to go   through boom bust boom bust boom bust   because I I secretly didn't want a   straight line.

 I think I think I   actually want the the the I want the   more interesting story. At 24, I was   offered $14 million for my company. Uh   and I blew it. I I screwed up the   negotiation and we ended up all walking   away from the deal. I think it would   have been the worst thing possible had I   had $14 million at uh at age 24.   >> So I've drawn a a little graph here on   this iPad.

 One axis is your success and   the other axis is time. Could you draw   for me what your career looks like in   terms of success over time including the   ups, the downs, etc., etc.   >> Well, if we just talk objectively what   other people would have seen. Um I do   this nightclub party and that's amazing.   And then I go and I get a job with a   mentor and then we build this business   that's like 6 million in its first year   and I'm like right close to it and we go   from zero to like 60 employees and then   I have a fight with my mentor and he   tells me go start your own business. So,   I go right down to start from scratch   again and I'm in I'm in a really   negative place. And then we get started   and suddenly I've got myself a   multi-million dollar business. And then   the government changes the law and we   have to reinvent that business. And then   we get a new amazing contract and now we   do a million a month. And this, by the   way, this is only like age 24. And then   we screw up the negotiation and it's   right back to the start. And then I go

  to London and I start a new business.   And that goes really really well really   quickly and like one year in we've got   the palladium theater and we're doing   hundreds of thousands a week worth of   sales and then the global financial   crisis resets the whole business and I   lose the major contracts that we have   and and then I relaunch the business and   then co comes along and we're by by this   stage we're in uh 11 cities doing a   couple of million per city and then I   relaunch the business as a digital   business and it goes off the scale again   right I'm running out of space here and   Now we've figured out, okay, we own the   assets, we own the brand, uh we've got a   great team, we've got multiple   businesses, and at the moment, and this   is around the time I have kids as well,   and it and it starts to really uh become   more stable and more fun and uh less up   and down. But that was my starting   point. Up, down, up, down, up, down.   >> And this is over the period of how many   years?   >> This was this was from 20 to 35. It was   just boom bust, boom bust, punch in the

  face, get back up, punch in the face,   get back up. Uh, zero millions, zero   millions, zero millions. I say all of   this because I think it's important to   people for people to realize the reality   of what it takes and how hard it is.   And, you know, oftent times if we want   to get, you know, have a high performing   podcast or write a great selling book,   we kind of describe it as a linear   journey.

 you're going to do this, then   you do this, then this is going to   happen, then you do this. Stick at it   for long enough, and then and then why?   But actually, in my experience, the   graph either looks like a boom and bust   cycle, which is kind of what I'm seeing   here in your graph, or it looks like   nothing, nothing nothing, nothing   nothing, something exponential.

  >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.   >> I mean, even this podcast, if you look   at the graph, it is nothing, nothing,   nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing,   nothing exponential.   >> 2 million, 4 million, 8 million, 16   million. Yeah. And so the question for   me always becomes like what would it   take for you to survive either in your   story this boom and bust scenario   >> or in many of the things I've done in my   life this no man's land   >> period of no it takes a certain   something in someone   >> Yeah   >> to be able to weather such a storm and   well I guess what what is that you said   a second ago I had no choice. Yeah, I   had no choice because I have no skills.   I'm not good at anything. You know, I've   got friends who are good at coding or   good at editing or they're good at   designing. They've got accounting or   they've got dentistry or something like   that to fall back on. I have no   qualifications. I've got a driver's   license is my only qualification. Um,   and I'm all I'm good at is organizing   teams and getting people in the room and

  getting them excited and essentially   encouraging them to work with me and and   build something together. So, I kind of   didn't have a choice but to keep playing   the game, keep trying.   >> And by the way, I wouldn't change any of   that. Like, there's there's no point   there where I'd go back and say,   "Actually, cuz where where I am now,   every single one of those crushing drops   is where I really learned something that   I leverage today.

" actually something I   said to someone who works in my team as   my business partner now, George Gibson,   when she emailed me two years ago asking   me to invest in a startup, a startup   that I myself had failed at. I basically   was trying to say, "This is not going to   work, but do it anyway because the   actual thing of value here might not be   the million-dollar exit.

 It's going to   be the lessons you learn from the   failure are going to then be leveraged   as I did at 20 years old when I went to   Silicon Valley and started talking to   people about this thing. I'd spent two   years failing and was getting paid   $70,000 a month to talk about this thing   as a 20-year-old with no qualifications   because I was one of the very few people   who had failed in social media and   therefore had a deep understanding and a   rare skill.

 You're no longer going on   BBC News night or in Forbes as the   person who did this, but of all the   things you've done in your life, this   great failing is going to be the most   valuable asset you have. And this is   what your story proves because every   time it goes higher.   >> Yeah, it really does. Yeah, it was it   was amazing.

 like the the like I can   tell you what the moments feel like at   the bottom and they're horrible and   alcohol's involved and uh you know like   wanting to just completely hide and you   know never be seen by anyone ever again   and then suddenly you go okay I mean   I've got this friend of mine who who's   an entrepreneur who's failed several   times and he says you feel like you're   on a tight rope and then you fall off   the tightroppe and you realize it was   only 6 in off the ground you know it's   not as bad as you think and you can hop   back on the tight rope and go and you   can go again But   every single time it's just gotten   better and better and better and bigger   and bigger and more more stable and more   like reliable.   >> There is another story which is one that   doesn't have the survivorship bias   because now Daniel, you've been wildly   successful. Walk down the street, people   know who you are. They, you know, you've   got millions of people that tune in to   watch you give advice. But there's also   a version of reality where that wasn't   the ending.   And I actually know someone who has

  fought for 15 years to build businesses   all across the world   >> and they they just don't have that   self-awareness piece.   >> Mhm.   >> I don't know if I'm self-aware. Like   none of us can actually know cuz that   requires self-awareness.   >> We've all got our blind spots.   >> They'll continue to start businesses and   it's putting their family at risk now.

  >> They go through the same boom and bust   cycle, but it never goes higher.   >> Y   >> and if you were to ask me objectively,   do I think they'll ever have the moment   you've had now? You have a survivorship   bias that I have. We did something, it   was hard, and then it paid off.   >> Here's the thing.

 There are no happy   endings. Uh, life ends abruptly.   One thing that happens when you get a   little older is you start discovering   that actually when when you're under 40,   you think everything ends well. And then   later on, you discover there are no   happy endings. Everyone dies. You get a   phone call one day and someone who is an   amazing person has a stroke.

  And that's them. That's them hit. That's   that's it. What you thought of that you   thought they'd have 20 more years and   they don't. You know, their entire life   changes.   You you're left with the realization   that it's just an adventure. Sometimes   sometimes the happy ending that other   people would call as a happy ending or   an objective happy ending is actually   pretty miserable in the middle of it.

  There are people who have everything.   you've met them and objectively they   have the houses and the cars and the   private jets and all that sort of stuff   and they're not particularly happy.   They're miserable. And then there are   some people who they lose all of that   stuff, but then they reconnect with a   group of friends and they're like   happier than they've ever been.

  >> Something's given you this insight.   >> Yeah. So, someone very close to me, very   dear to me, recently had a stroke, you   know, and   yeah, you realize that the happy ending   is not guaranteed. In fact, the opposite   is guaranteed. you realize everyone   everyone dies, everyone decays, everyone   gets old. If you're lucky, you get old.

  Uh and if you're unlucky, you don't get   old. Um so you have to there comes a   point where you have to release the idea   that you're going to have this happy   ending. You're going to have moments of   triumph and moments of disaster. You're   going to lose people. You're going to   have everything taken from you.

 It's   guaranteed everything is taken from you.   >> How did that change your perspective?   this loved one going through this,   >> you you realized that uh   you real or I realized that the mental   timeline of endless decades spreading   out ahead, endless amounts of health,   endless amounts of relationships   is not it's a it's a nice fantasy that   keeps us together, but it's not   guaranteed.

 And then the impact for me   is to treasure relationships.   Um there comes a moment   where I don't know if this has ever   happened to you yet, but you go, "Wow, I   didn't know that was the last   conversation."   Um, you don't realize this, but one of   the legacies that you leave behind, not   you because you've got this body of   work, but one of the legacies that   people leave behind is little voice   notes that they leave in your phone that   they leave in your WhatsApp   and   you listen back to some of these voice   notes and you go, "Wow, I didn't know   that was a treasure. Didn't know that   was a special thing." Um, and this   particular person who got impacted with   the stroke, he was wonderful at voice   notes. He he had this thing that he   would do called uh, it's not lost on me,   voice notes. And I don't even think he   knew he was saying this, but it was his   one of his favorite phrases, which was

  it's not lost lost on me. So he'd he'd   leave a voice note and he'd say,   "Stephen, it's not lost on me how much   you're dealing with at the moment and   it's not lost on me that you are   responsible for a lot of people's lives   and all this and I just want to   acknowledge you." So, so he would leave   these voice notes and um and he did this   with everyone like it came out of the   woodwork that everyone got these lovely   voice notes from this guy and um   yeah, you you don't realize but like   literally that is a huge part of   people's legacies. You think you're   going to leave behind all this money.   You think you're going to leave behind   all of this big stuff. You think you're   going to leave behind some huge   financial structure. And in the end, you   leave behind some really touching voice   notes as as one of the things that will   be most treasured if you're lucky.   >> You've been listening to the voice   notes?   >> Yeah, I have. Yeah. Yeah. Really, really   nice. Really, really nice.

  >> What is that emotion in your face,   Daniel? What's the range of emotions?   Um, it's just the deeper awareness that   the the the real, you know, we talk a   lot about technology, we talk a lot   about business,   but the whole game is relationships.   >> It's very easy to get that wrong,   >> isn't it?   >> Very easy for you to get that wrong   >> because um you're surrounded by such a   whirlwind.

  And   people want so much from you. You know,   a lot of people want a lot from you. And   you think you have to lift people up   around you and you have to do this   heroic effort. Actually, little text   message, little voice note means a lot.   It's interesting. You for me, I figured   out that we're that we're on a rock.

 We   get a few little laps around the sun.   That's it. We get this. We like   literally pop into existence like an   electron spinning around a a neutron,   whatever it is, and we we get we're   we're on the rock. The most valuable   thing is that we're on the rock   together. Like you zoom out enough,   we're all just little dots.

 We're all   just little dots trying to figure stuff   out. Um and we're all trying to make   sense of our own lives and we're all   trying to ignore how, you know,   difficult things can be. And um but then   you realize that it's just the fact that   we are moving through time together. But   yeah, you you as I said, you hit a point   where you realize that uh there is no   happy ending.

 Unfortunately, there's not   uh you you you know the the ending is   sad. When you hit a certain age, people   that you really love get old get old and   die or they get illnesses. They lose a   big chunk of themselves in one fell   swoop. So, um, while those moments are   happy, while you've got those happy   moments, treasure those happy moments.

  Really, really embrace them.   >> Do you have any regrets in this regard   that might help me avoid having similar   regrets?   >> I really don't. I'm really, really happy   that things like I'm really   the biggest relationships are with my   kids and with my wife and family   formation.   I've I've had unbelievably high highs.

  Like I've been on the big boats. I've   flown on the private jets. I've had   parties in my honor. I've had big   paydays.   All of that cool stuff that people dream   of. Family formation is where like the   core the core of it. Like that's the   core of happiness for me, you know, the   the the intergenerational passing of   life.

 Uh which is which is kind of like   wow. like that that we I think we've   forgotten how cool that is. I think   we've forgotten the idea that you're   passing on consciousness and that this   being has their own consciousness. They   do their own thing. They come up with   their own ideas. They have their own   challenges. Um yeah, it's wild.   >> Daniel, thank you. We're done.

  >> That was great. YouTube have this new   crazy algorithm where they know exactly   what video you would like to watch next   based on AI and all of your viewing   behavior. And the algorithm says that   this video is the perfect video for you.   It's different for everybody looking   right now.

 Check this video out and I   bet you you might love
