Part 1: The Fundamentals — Why Tiny Changes Make a Big Difference
Press enter or click to view image in full size

Photo by Dan Gold on Unsplash
Often when it comes to planning our new habits, goals, or resolutions, we focus on big changes. We want to run a marathon, become fluent in French, journal every day — and then we wonder why we fail each time.

The reality is that we don’t change overnight, and that making new habits (and breaking old habits) takes time. It’s a long game and it takes patience. James Clear talks of the ‘compounding effect’ and the idea that getting 1% better every day leads to large changes over time, even if you don’t notice that change day-to-day.

“This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our fingers and deciding to be someone entirely new. We change bit by bit, day by day, habit by habit. We are continually undergoing microevolutions of the self. ”

As I mentioned in the introduction to this post, James also sets out his key idea that the best way to change habits is to focus on who you want to become, not what you want to achieve.

He suggests asking yourself the question ‘Who is the type of person that could get the outcome I want?’ So that might be shaped as, for instance, ‘Who is the type of person who could learn a new language?’ And then shape your habits and actions around this question, letting your identity drive your actions rather than the results or outcomes.

“I have a frend who lost over 100 pounds by asking herself ‘What would a healthy person do?’ All day long she would use this question as a guide. Would a healthy person walk or take a cab? Would a healthy person order a burrito or a salad?”

The final chapter of this first part starts to outline the process of building habits, which the rest of the book will then delve into. He defines a habit as ‘a behaviour which is done so many times it becomes automatic’. The four steps to ensure that you keep repeating the behaviour to make the habit stick, are:

Make it obvious
Make it attractive
Make it easy
Make it satisfying